Ordinary General Meeting of ShareholdersRome, 31 March 2020Address by Governor2019126thFinancial Year126th financial yearAnnual Accounts2019126th FINANCIAL YEAR

Address by GovernorOrdinary General Meeting of ShareholdersRome, 31 March 2020

BANCA D’ITALIAAddress by Governor3Ordinary General Meeting of ShareholdersLadies and Gentlemen,Italy, Europe, and the entire world are experiencing the same anxiety and difficulty that come with any unprecedented challenge. Aside from posing a deadly threat to public health and putting a severe strain on national health systems, the rapid spread of the Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has transformed our daily lives, our work processes, the functioning of our schools and universities; the extent of the impact on the economic and financial system will be as wide as it is deep.In carrying out its institutional functions, and in tandem with the other national institutions, the Bank of Italy has taken the necessary action to limit the economic repercussions of the pandemic. While the health of all of our staff is our absolute priority, we continue to guarantee the provision of essential services to the wider public. In my Concluding Remarks delivered on 31 May last, I recalled the changes made to the composition of the Governing Board in 2019: Fabio Panetta was appointed Senior Deputy Governor, Luigi Federico Signorini confirmed as Deputy Governor, and Alessandra Perrazzelli and Daniele Franco also both appointed as Deputy Governors. I wish once again to thank Salvatore Rossi and Valeria Sannucci for their many years of service to the Bank, in the roles of Senior Deputy Governor and Deputy Governor respectively. The Bank is – we all are – hugely indebted to them.On 1 January this year the composition of the Board of Directors changed again. Daniele Franco succeeded Fabio Panetta as Senior Deputy Governor following the latter’s appointment to the ECB’s Executive Board. Our thanks also go to Fabio Panetta; we wish him every success in his new important role. Finally, Piero Cipollone, formerly Managing Director responsible for high-level consultancy to the Governing Board on matters pertaining to the organization of the Bank’s functions and institutional relations, was appointed Deputy Governor. Last year the process of reallocating the Bank’s capital continued. Since the launch of the reform of the Bank’s ownership structure (Law 5/2014), 40.4 per cent of its capital has been reallocated, 7 per cent since March 2019. 
BANCA D’ITALIAAddress by GovernorOrdinary General Meeting of Shareholders4Of the 143 current shareholders, 115 invested after the reform law was passed (6 insurance companies, 8 pension funds, 10 social security institutions, 29 banking foundations and 62 banks). The nominal value of the shareholdings exceeding the 3 per cent capital limit is just under €2 billion, compared with total capital of €7.5 billion. Last year, the nominal value of the shareholdings exceeding the threshold was €2.5 billion and two years ago it was €2.7 billion. Given that the broadening of the shareholder base is among the goals of the reform, the Bank is desirous that the redistribution of the shareholdings, in accordance with the limits set by law, continue at a fast pace. On behalf of the Board of Directors and the Governing Board, I would like to welcome those who have acquired a shareholding in the Bank’s capital, even if they are not physically present at the meeting today. The annual accounts submitted for your approval show a net profit of €8.2 billion, €2 billion more than in the previous year. This is the highest ever profit posted in the history of the Bank of Italy. After four years of continuous expansion, the balance sheet total of the Bank of Italy, in line with that of the Eurosystem, recorded a small decline linked to fewer monetary policy operations. The size of the balance sheet remains considerable, however: at €1,000 billion, it has expanded by more than 80 per cent since the end of 2014. This has translated into a significant increase in profitability, which has in part been used to strengthen financial buffers against risks. In the last five years, gross profit – before taxes and transfers to the general risk provision – totalled approximately €41 billion. The total amount allocated to the State – also considering the proposed distribution submitted for your approval – is €21 billion, in addition to taxes amounting to €6 billion.Future earnings will depend on developments in the financial markets, on the riskiness of assets, as well as on the monetary policy measures that will be adopted by the Governing Council of the ECB. What happens in the near future will be heavily influenced by how Italy and Europe respond to the emergency, first and foremost in terms of health care, then on an economic and financial plane. We are closely monitoring all developments and the implications of the pandemic for the economy, price stability, the performance of banks, and the financial markets. We have adopted a comprehensive package of measures designed to guarantee ample liquidity to all sectors of the economy and to address the risks of financial fragmentation along national lines, thereby ensuring that monetary policy decisions are transmitted more effectively. 
BANCA D’ITALIAAddress by Governor5Ordinary General Meeting of ShareholdersThe expansionary monetary policy of the Eurosystem and the Bank of Italy’s balance sheetIn 2019 the monetary policy of the Eurosystem remained expansionary in order to counter the downside risks to inflation stemming from the weakening economic outlook.In its September meeting, the ECB’s Governing Council lowered the deposit facility rate by ten basis points, bringing it to -0.50 per cent; at the same time it introduced a two-tier system for reserve remuneration, in which part of banks’ reserve holdings in excess of the minimum requirements are exempt from the negative deposit facility rate and remunerated at a rate of 0.0 per cent.Also in September, a new series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO III) was introduced, each with a maturity of three years, to be conducted on a quarterly basis. Initially equal to the average rate on the main refinancing operations over the life of each targeted operation (currently set at zero per cent), the interest rate can be as low as the average rate on the deposit facility, depending on the volume of net lending by banks. Since November, net purchases of public- and private-sector securities have resumed at a monthly pace of €20 billion; this will continue for as long as necessary to strengthen the accommodative impact of the policy rates in tandem with the ECB’s explicit objective of ending the purchases shortly before it starts raising its key policy rates. These purchases are in addition to the full reinvestment of the principal payments from maturing securities purchased under the programme; this too will continue for as long as necessary to maintain favourable liquidity conditions and an ample degree of monetary accommodation.To mitigate the impact of the ongoing pandemic, in its meeting of  12 March, the Governing Council adopted a broad package of measures. To support bank lending to those most financially affected by the spread of COVID-19 – particularly small and medium-sized enterprises – from June 2020 to June 2021 the conditions applied to TLTRO III will be considerably more favourable. Both the initial rate and the (lower) rate actually applied to counterparties based on the achievement of lending targets have been lowered by 25 basis points and the targets’ attainment has also been facilitated. The maximum amount that the counterparties can borrow through these operations will be raised to €3,000 billion. As a bridging measure, until  June 2020 additional LTROs will be conducted at favourable conditions and with full allotment of the amounts requested. Alongside the asset purchase programme already under way, equal to €20 billion in monthly purchases, 
BANCA D’ITALIAAddress by GovernorOrdinary General Meeting of Shareholders6a further €120 billion has been allocated for additional net purchases until the end of the year, with a significant contribution from the private sector purchase programmes.These measures were further reinforced at the meeting of 18 March last, when the Governing Council announced a new programme for the purchase of public- and private-sector securities amounting to €750 billion  this year. This new pandemic emergency purchase programme (pepp) will continue until the end of 2020 but may be extended if the public health emergency continues. Ample flexibility is envisaged for purchases of public-sector securities to enable, should market conditions require it, divergences with respect to the current allocations, both in respect of jurisdictions and asset classes. The range of eligible securities issued by private firms has been extended to include commercial paper of sufficient credit quality; the eligibility criteria for collateral have been relaxed further, to facilitate recourse to refinancing by banks. Within our mandate, we stand ready to increase the volume of purchases, adjust their composition and explore all possible options for supporting the economy in this acutely difficult phase. It was also decided to consider revising past self-imposed limits in carrying out these operations, to the extent necessary to make the interventions proportionate to the current risks; any impediment that might hamper the effective transmission of monetary policy will not be tolerated.The balance sheet At the end of 2019, the Bank of Italy’s total assets amounted to  €960 billion, a decrease of €8 billion compared with the year before. Assets continued to consist mostly of securities purchased for monetary policy purposes, equal to €384 billion, of which around €320 billion made up of Italian government securities. Refinancing operations, totalling  €220 billion, decreased by €24 billion owing to early repayments on TLTRO II operations, only partly offset by amounts allotted under the new TLTRO III operations. Overall, monetary policy assets make up more than 60 per cent of the total balance sheet.The value of gold rose by almost €20 billion compared with 2018, reaching €107 billion. In line with Eurosystem accounting rules, this appreciation is not recorded in the profit and loss account and therefore did not affect the Bank’s operating result, as it was reflected in a corresponding increase in the revaluation account on the liabilities side.
BANCA D’ITALIAAddress by Governor7Ordinary General Meeting of ShareholdersInvestment assets, amounting to €140 billion, consist mainly of bonds and, to a lesser extent, equity shares. Since last year, the Bank has modified its investment strategy, integrating Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) factors into the management of its equity portfolio. Shares of companies that operate mainly in sectors not compliant with the principles of the  UN Global Compact have been excluded, those of companies with the highest ESG scores favoured. The Bank is already looking into extending this new investment strategy to corporate bonds as early as this year.On the liability side, the Bank of Italy’s negative balance on the TARGET2 payment system declined for the first time in five years, from €482 billion to €439 billion over the course of 2019. The decrease occurred primarily in the second half of the year, initially as a result of the inflow of capital from abroad, mainly owing to higher demand for Italian government securities, and thereafter due to the net foreign funding by Italian banks, driven by the Eurosystem’s new system for banks’ reserves remuneration, which was also reflected in the increase in deposits of credit institutions (from €89 billion to €102 billion). Finally, the value of banknotes in circulation continued to increase: reported in the Bank’s balance sheet in proportion to its share in the ECB’s capital key, their value increased by €4 billion, reaching €202 billion at the end of 2019.Profitability, risks and organizational measuresThe gross profit for 2019, before taxes and transfers to the general risk provision, was equal to €10.8 billion. The €2 billion increase over 2018 is mainly attributable to income components that may not recur to the same degree in the future. In particular, the positive performance of the stock markets in 2019 – accompanied by the Bank’s extensive rebalancing of its portfolio to integrate ESG factors – led to a reduction in write-downs and to a marked improvement in realized gains from trading operations. Net interest income, which is central banks’ traditional source of income, also contributed positively to the increase in gross profit, rising by €0.2 billion on 2018 to €9.6 billion.Operating expenses declined by about 1 per cent, reflecting in part lower depreciation. Although there were minor internal changes in composition, staff costs and administrative expenses remained essentially unchanged.In order to cope with the risks to which the Bank is exposed, financial buffers were increased by transferring to the general risk provision the same 
BANCA D’ITALIAAddress by GovernorOrdinary General Meeting of Shareholders8amount as the year before (€1.5 billion), without affecting the statutory reserves. Taxes for the year amounted to about €1 billion, similar to the figure recorded in 2018 (€1.2 billion).The Bank’s human resource policies are contributing to a generational turnover that is reflected in a gradual decline in the staff’s average age, which was 48.3 years at the end of the year. Women now represent a larger proportion of total staff, rising from 36 to 38 per cent over the last five years. These staff-related initiatives flank those to reorganize the Bank’s structure in order to make the performance of its institutional activities at the service of the public more effective, and to adapt its working practices to developments at national and European level. In relation to this, in July 2019, the statistics function was reorganized to improve the quality of the data produced by the Bank, to make production processes more efficient, and to further develop the methodologies used. In early 2020, the powers of the Financial Intelligence Unit for Italy (UIF) were enhanced by strengthening its inspection and sanctioning functions. Two more organizational changes were also made; the first was to strengthen the Bank’s consumer protection and financial education functions by transferring their activities to a new directorate general; the second was to integrate traditional retail payment services and highly technological and innovative payment services within a single directorate general. As usual, further information on the activities of the Bank and on the organizational and management measures implemented in 2019 is available in the Report on Operations and Activities of the Bank of Italy, which will be published in May, on the occasion of the presentation of the Annual Report. Proposal for the allocation of the net profitShareholders,Pursuant to Article 38 of the Statute, acting on a proposal of the Governing Board and after hearing the opinion of the Board of Auditors,  I present for your approval the Board of Directors’ proposal for the allocation of the net profit. On behalf of the Board of Directors and the Governing Board, I would like to take this opportunity to thank the new Board of Auditors for their valuable contribution. As you may recall, under the dividend policy in force, the amount paid to the shareholders is kept within a range of €340 million to €380 million, provided that the net profit is sufficient and without prejudice to the Bank’s capital adequacy. The difference between the upper limit of the range and 
the dividend paid to the shareholders may be allocated to the special item for stabilizing dividends, until this item reaches a maximum amount of €450 million.Accordingly, from the net profit of €8,247 million, we propose allocating €340 million as a dividend to the shareholders, equal to 4.5 per cent of the capital. Also this year, we propose allocating €40 million to the special item for stabilizing dividends, which would then amount to €160 million.Pursuant to the Statute, shares exceeding the 3 per cent threshold are not entitled to a dividend. Therefore, the dividend actually due to the shareholders would amount to €251 million. The dividend corresponding to the shares exceeding the threshold, equal to €89 million, would be allocated to the ordinary reserve. As a result, the remaining profit for the State would be equal to  €7,867 million which, in addition to taxes for the year amounting  to €1,009 million, would bring the total amount allocated to the State, to around €8.9 billion, over €2 billion more than last year.
Designed by  the Printing and Publishing Division  of the Bank of Italy
 I would like to thank Matthew Willison, Hugh Burns, Nicolo Fraccaroli and David Swallow for their assistance in preparing these remarks  1     The ideal post-EU regulatory framework  Speech given by Victoria Saporta, Executive Director of Prudential Policy  International Business & Diplomatic Exchange 2020 Annual Conference, London 10 March 2020   
 I would like to thank Matthew Willison, Hugh Burns, Nicolo Fraccaroli and David Swallow for their assistance in preparing these remarks  2  A lot has changed since the last global financial crisis.  Banks are much more resilient. The PRA has authorised 18 new banks in the past five years, with further banks in the pipeline to be authorised.  The role of non-banks and market-based finance has been growing.  And digitalisation is transforming a number of financial services.   In spite of these changes, the fundamental market failures that justify the need for prudential regulation remain.  This is because financial firms can take actions that create “negative externalities” – jargon for someone making bets that hurt innocent bystanders when they go wrong.  And in the case of “systemic” negative externalities they hurt the economy at large, as the Great Financial Crisis reminded us.  Equally, these market failures need to be dealt with in a manner that does not introduce frictions that hurt innovation and long-term productivity and economic growth.  Prudential regulation that deals effectively with these market failures has to be underpinned by an appropriate institutional structure:   a set of clear responsibilities enshrined in law on who sets the objective for prudential regulation and how, who regulates, and where the details of prudential regulation should sit.    But what is the ideal institutional structure that would allow us to update, change and simplify these rules?  This is a timely question.  Less than a month and a half ago, the UK exited the EU.   The implementation period is due to last until the end of this year.  While we are in the implementation period, the Government and the regulators will continue to onshore any new financial regulations and standards coming from the EU that take effect this year.  And at the end of the implementation period, the UK will be left with the same complex set of EU law and regulations onshored in a way that replicates the rather unique way the EU – as a supranational institution – the area of financial services.  The technical detail of the prudential requirements will sit in a dispersed variety of places: primary legislation, a range of statutory instruments, on-shored binding technical standards, and PRA rules and guidance. This ‘patchwork’ naturally makes the framework difficult for firms to navigate – particularly smaller firms with more limited resources to devote to compliance.  It is partly for that reason that the previous Chancellor Philip Hammond announced in the 2019 Spring Statement that HM Treasury will be reviewing the post-exit regulatory framework.  This review will include ‘the need to ensure financial stability is delivered through an effective regulatory framework, with the responsiveness necessary for a dynamic and open financial services sector and an appropriate level of democratic accountability’.1   The first stage of that review, focused on regulatory coordination, was launched in July 2019.2    Ultimately, the design of the post-EU regulatory framework will be for Parliament to decide in due course.                                                       1https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/785618/WMS_final_Commons.pdf.  2 For more detail on the review, see https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/financial-services-future-regulatory-framework-review. 
 I would like to thank Matthew Willison, Hugh Burns, Nicolo Fraccaroli and David Swallow for their assistance in preparing these remarks  3  Last year Sam Woods set out a set of principles to which any future UK regulatory framework should adhere.  This speech builds on these principles to propose an ideal framework from the perspective of achieving the Bank of England’s objectives. 3   It then looks at whether the existing empirical evidence, including some new research carried out recently by colleagues in the Bank, supports the framework.  Ideal features of the institutional structure of prudential regulation  Sam Woods’ six principles of regulation are shown in Figure 1.  In building the framework, I start by mapping these principles to three ideal features of regulation also depicted in the Figure.   The first feature is that the structure needs to have dynamism.  By this, I mean adjustments made to regulation over time to incorporate updated international standards in a timely manner, including to adjust for any unintended consequences of regulation. For example if the international standards are not designed with certain business models in mind, to reflect the advance of new technologies and to reflect new risks and opportunities.  I have spoken at length elsewhere about the benefits of dynamism, so will not dwell on this more here.4   The second feature the institutional structure should have is time consistency.    Time consistency is perhaps best understood by describing its opposite, time inconsistency.   Public policy suffers from time inconsistency when there is a conflict between a policymaker’s short-term incentives and their long-term incentives.  In the context of prudential regulation, over the long run, a policymaker wants to avoid financial crises.  Robust prudential standards are the means of achieving this.  In the short term, however, there may be benefits from weakening prudential standards.  For instance, a government might benefit electorally from the resulting short-term boost to credit supply.  There is empirical evidence for this happening in practice.5  But the long-term consequence of always acting on those short-term incentives is an unstable financial system.    The benefits of time consistency have been long recognised in monetary policy.  Finally, the structure will need to have legitimacy.                                                            3 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2019/sam-woods-ubs-20th-annual-financial-institutions-conference-lausanne.    4 See https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2018/victoria-saporta-speech-at-the-westminster-business-forum-keynote-seminar and https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2019/victoria-saporta-speech-at-risk-net-liquidity-and-funding-risk-europe . 5 See Antoniades and Calomiris (2018) and Dagher (2018).  
 I would like to thank Matthew Willison, Hugh Burns, Nicolo Fraccaroli and David Swallow for their assistance in preparing these remarks  4  To achieve this, the regulatory authority needs to be given a mandate.    A mandate provides a regulator with legitimacy in two ways.  First, it ensures there is democratic control over the shape of the regulatory regime; e.g., the objective or objectives of the prudential regulation, the types of firm in scope, the issues the regulator must have regard to in making policy.  Second, it makes possible to hold the regulator into account.  Figure 1: Links between the principles of ‘stylish’ regulation and ideal features of the institutional structure of prudential regulation    Alternative models for the institutional structure  There are broadly four alternative models for the institutional structure for prudential regulation.    The first model is that prudential regulation is specified in primary legislation.  The approach to prudential regulation that the EU takes is an example of this model since for example regulatory requirements are mostly specified in the Capital Requirements Regulation and Capital Requirements Directive.      This means that many of the technical details that make up prudential regulation are included in legislation.  This would include, for instance, the mathematical formulae used to calculate risk weights.     
 I would like to thank Matthew Willison, Hugh Burns, Nicolo Fraccaroli and David Swallow for their assistance in preparing these remarks  5  This model provides legitimacy because the legislation in which the prudential regulation is set out has been passed by a parliament.  It is also time consistent, because a deviation from regulatory standards would require a change to legislation.    But it is unlikely to be very dynamic because the only way prudential regulation could be adjusted in response to an unintended consequence or new risk that has arisen is a change to the primary legislation, which takes time to happen.    It typically takes nine months to issue a new PRA rule – with that time including policy development, cost benefit analysis, process for public consultation, and approval by the Prudential Regulation Committee.  In contrast, the process for making changes to primary legislation in the UK – which includes debates in committees and both houses of Parliament – requires finding Parliamentary time for legislation, and then after Parliamentary time has been secured, takes longer than a year to complete.  Finding Parliamentary time is not an easy task, especially if the purpose of legislation is carrying out technical amendments to financial services rules.  Public officials need to compete for attention  with all the other important public-policy issues that Parliament and government must deal with and if they do not find a Parliamentary slot or Parliament is dissolved for elections, the legislation gets delayed for the next Queen’s speech.  For example, over the past six months, such events have delayed the passage of a Bill that is necessary to implement the final elements of Basel 3 (so-called Basel 3.1).  By contrast, the financial regulator’s task is solely focussed on delivering and maintaining rules that are fit for purpose for their regulated sector only – there is no competition for other initiatives and the process and timetable provides certainty to industry.   In a second model, prudential regulatory-setting powers could lie with government ministers.    This model would be dynamic because the government would be able to adjust prudential regulation.  It would be legitimate since the government is directly accountable to the parliament and ultimately the electorate.  But it may not be time consistent because it creates the possibility that prudential regulation will be influenced unduly by the electoral cycle, as was deemed to have happened to monetary policy prior to central bank independence.    Alternatively and in a third model, these powers could be given to an independent regulatory body.  This model is likely to ensure that prudential regulation is both dynamic and time-consistent.  An expert regulator would be able to identify and implement necessary dynamic adjustments, and, for reputation reasons, it would have an incentive to maintain prudential standards provided that it avoided industry capture.  But, absent further accountability mechanisms to enhance it, it would lack legitimacy.    In summary, each of these models lacks one of the ideal features for the institutional structure of prudential regulation.   
 I would like to thank Matthew Willison, Hugh Burns, Nicolo Fraccaroli and David Swallow for their assistance in preparing these remarks  6  The fourth model is an independent regulatory body with a clear mandate set out in primary legislation and a clear set of accountability mechanisms to Parliament.  This model combines the benefits of an expert regulator that can adjust prudential regulation dynamically, with an objective that incentivises it to maintain prudential standards, while using the mandate and the accountability mechanisms to ensure legitimacy.    Table 1 summarises the degree to which these four models possess the three ideal features of an institutional structure of prudential regulation.  In theory at least, this fourth model is preferable because, unlike the other models, it possesses all three of the ideal features.    Table 1: Comparison of alternative models of the institutional structure of prudential regulation Model Dynamic? Time-consistent? Legitimate? Primary legislation X √ √ Government √ X √ Regulator √ √ x Regulator + clear mandate +accountability mechanisms to Parliament √ √ √  There are plenty of precedents for this institutional structure of prudential regulation, including in the UK.    The Financial Services and Markets Act 2000, better known as FSMA, established a regulator in the form of the FSA and specified the regulator’s objectives and responsibilities.  The detailed regulatory rules, however, were set out by the FSA in its handbook, not written into the Act.    Following the financial crisis, the model for prudential regulation in the UK has been further developed by the establishment of the Financial Policy Committee (FPC) and the Prudential Regulation Authority (PRA). The mandates for both the FPC and PRA are set out in primary legislation: the FPC is responsible for protecting and enhancing the overall stability of the UK financial system; and the PRA’s primary objectives are to promote the safety and soundness of regulated firms and to contribute to the securing of an appropriate degree of protection for policyholders.    But importantly, the mandates for the FPC and PRA ensure that other factors such as long-term productivity and economic growth are taken into account when setting policy. The FPC must pursue its financial stability objective without causing serious harm to the wider economy in the medium or 
 I would like to thank Matthew Willison, Hugh Burns, Nicolo Fraccaroli and David Swallow for their assistance in preparing these remarks  7  long term.  In other words, the FPC must avoid the ‘stability of the graveyard’.6  And, the FPC also has a secondary objective, subject to its pursuit of its primary objective: that of supporting the economic policy of the government. The PRA also has an important secondary objective to facilitate effective competition, and must have regard to a set of regulatory principles, including the desirability of sustainable economic growth. Furthermore, the Chancellor writes regular letters to both the FPC and the Prudential Regulation Committee, setting out the Government’s economic policy and making recommendations on how they should discharge their functions.  Importantly, the PRA takes into account the FPC’s views on financial stability when setting microprudential policy.  To give an example of how this works in practice – in 2015 the FPC set out the optimal overall level of UK capital requirements, balancing financial stability against economic growth.  The PRC then took into account this judgement when setting individual bank capital requirements.  And at the end of last year, the Financial Policy Committee (FPC) raised the structural level of the UK countercyclical capital buffer (CCyB) rate - that is the rate it expects to set in a standard risk environment - from in the region of 1% to in the region of 2%. Then, last month, the PRA consulted on proposals to reduce variable microprudential minimum requirements (so-called variable Pillar 2A capital requirements) to take account of the additional resilience associated with higher macroprudential buffers in a standard risk environment.7    In addition to setting out a clear mandate in primary legislation, there are also a number of accountability mechanisms in place for Parliament to scrutinise the work of the FPC and PRA against that mandate. For example, PRA senior representatives are expected to appear before the Treasury Select Committee (and other Parliamentary Committees), when requested. And the PRA Annual Report is laid before Parliament.  Outside the UK, the model of independent regulators with mandates making rules is common practice in most other jurisdictions.  The need for operational independence is reflected in the Basel Core Principles for banking supervision.8  All jurisdictions represented in the Basel Committee implemented the Basel 3 reforms through regulators’ rules or guidelines rather than primary legislation, with the exceptions of the EU, with its very specific supranational structure, and Switzerland, with its unique federal structure.                                                         6 Details of the FPC’s objectives and primary responsibilities are set out in section 9C of the Bank of England Act 1998. In particular, the FPC is charged with ‘the identification of, monitoring of, and taking of action to remove or reduce, systemic risks with a view to protecting and enhancing the resilience of the UK financial system’, but this does not ‘require or authorise the Committee to exercise its functions in a way that would in its opinion be likely to have a significant adverse effect on the capacity of the financial sector to contribute to the growth of the UK economy in the medium or long term’.  For a more detailed discussion of the FPC’s mandate, see my colleague Alex Brazier’s May 2019 speech, ‘Citizens in service, not people in power’, available at https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/speech/2019/citizens-in-service-not-people-in-power-speech-by-alex-brazier.pdf.  The Governor also spoke about the trade-off as part of his speech the “Grand Unifying Theory (and practice) of Macroprudential Policy” available at https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/speech/2020/the-grand-unifying-theory-and-practice-of-macroprudential-policy-speech-by-mark-carney.pdf?la=en&hash=53A55C800C6B04573DC04FD2F9579079A3503FED 7 See https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/prudential-regulation/consultation-paper/2020/cp220.pdf?la=en&hash=133449CBB3D0FDD2B03AC6242C99C3F36A150258 8 The second core principle states that ‘[t]he supervisor possesses operational independence, transparent processes, sound governance, budgetary processes that do not undermine autonomy and adequate resources, and is accountable for the discharge of its duties and use of its resources’ (https://www.bis.org/basel_framework/chapter/BCP/01.htm?inforce=20190101).  
 I would like to thank Matthew Willison, Hugh Burns, Nicolo Fraccaroli and David Swallow for their assistance in preparing these remarks  8   Regulatory independence and financial stability in practice  Does the evidence support the theory that an independent regulatory body with a clear mandate and strong accountability produces better outcomes?   At the Bank, Fraccaroli, Sowerbutts and Whitworth (2019) have been researching whether the institutional structure for prudential regulation affects financial stability in practice.  They have done this by analysing whether there is a statistically significant association between the independence of the prudential regulator and/or supervisor and financial stability outcomes.    The authors have constructed for different countries and over time an index of regulatory-supervisory independence.  The index combines three aspects of independence: institutional; regulatory; and budgetary.  The definitions of these aspects can be found in Table 2.  Table 2: Definitions of aspects of independence captured in the Regulatory-Supervisory Independence index Aspect of independence Definition Institutional  This captures the involvement of political bodies in the appointment and dismissal of the head of the regulatory agency, as well as length of their term. The more independent are the actors in charge of the appointment and removal process, the more independent the regulatory agency will be. Moreover, the longer the head’s term, the more protected the agency is from the electoral cycle. Regulatory This captures whether the agency needs government approval to issue binding legislation. Higher regulatory independence allows the regulator to adapt prudential rules quickly and flexibly and to better identify with the rule-implementation and enforcement.(a)  Budgetary  This is based on whether needs government approval on its budget, which could affect the regulator’s ability to act independently.(b)  (a) See Quintyn and Taylor (2002).  (b) See page 79 of OECD (2016).  Data on these aspects are drawn from the responses given by supervisors to a World Bank survey (Barth et al (2013)) and the statutes of the regulatory agencies and amendments to those statutes.    The authors then aggregated these aspects into a single index of Regulatory-Supervisory Independence, covering 43 countries and the period 1999 to 2019.     
 I would like to thank Matthew Willison, Hugh Burns, Nicolo Fraccaroli and David Swallow for their assistance in preparing these remarks  9  Chart 1 shows the average regulatory-supervisory index and the global average an index of central bank independence with respect to monetary policy.  Both have increased over time, but central bank independence started growing earlier and initially as a faster pace.  Chart 1: Regulatory-Supervisory Independence and central bank independence, 1999-2019 (a)  (a) The data on central bank independence is drawn from Bodea and Hicks (2015) and Garriga (2016). Weighted versions of the indices are used to aid comparison.  The weighting is based on Cukierman et al (1992).   The second step in the analysis was to examine whether there is an association between the Regulatory-Supervisory Independence index and financial stability.  Defining an ex ante quantitative indicator of the success or otherwise of prudential regulation is hard, unlike with monetary policy where such measures are easier to arrive at.  But fortunately, this is less of a problem for this analysis because we have ex post observations of distress in the banking system.  The authors used rates of non-performing loans at banks as a measure of financial (in)stability.9    They analyse whether reforms that increased regulatory-supervisory independence were associated with subsequent a reduction in the rates of non-performing loans.  Panel data regression show a                                                       9 That is, non-performing loans as a proportion of total gross loans.   
 I would like to thank Matthew Willison, Hugh Burns, Nicolo Fraccaroli and David Swallow for their assistance in preparing these remarks  10  negative and statistically significant association between independence-increasing reforms and rates of non-performing loans – see Table 3.    Table 3: Results for regressions of non-performing loans as % of total loans on the Regulatory-Supervisory Independence Index   (1) (a) (2) (a) Regulatory-Supervisory Independence Index -1.194 *** (0.405) -1.300 ** (0.495) Regulatory-Supervisory Independence Index lagged by one year  -0.970 ** (0.322) Observations 29,782 28,002 Adjusted R2 0.227 0.245  (a) The regression equation includes bank fixed effects, country fixed effects, and year fixed effects.  Standard errors, which are clustered at the country level, are reported in parentheses.  The results are robust under different specifications, including using a set of bank-specific control variables (total assets, z-score, cost-to-income ratio, efficiency ratio, total debt, total liabilities, total gross loans) and country-specific GDP growth.    This association is there even as the set of control variables in the regression is varied.   The association is also persistent: the coefficient on the reforms lagged by one year is similar in magnitude and statistical significance.      The association is also economically significant.  A reform that increases the index in a given year is associated with a 1.3 percentage point reduction in the rate non-performing loans and a 0.97 percentage point reduction in the subsequent year, all else equal.     These results are consistent with what other papers have found. Dincer and Eichengreen (2012) find that lower non-performing loans relative to GDP in countries in which the supervisor is independent of the government.  Klomp and de Haan (2009) find a negative association between a measure of financial instability and the degree of central bank independence.    There is also evidence that supervisors that are probably more independent of the banks they supervise tend to be more robust.  For instance, Agarwal et al (2014) finds in the United States federal regulators are twice as likely to downgrade banks’ supervisory ratings as state regulators.  Ben-David et al (2018) analyse the impact of supervisory responsibility for large banks moving from national regulators to the ECB’s Single Supervisory Mechanism or SSM.  They find banks for whom the SSM became their supervisor sought to manipulate their balance sheets to fall below the thresholds for being in scope of the SSM, suggesting banks anticipated that the SSM would be a tougher supervisor.      
 I would like to thank Matthew Willison, Hugh Burns, Nicolo Fraccaroli and David Swallow for their assistance in preparing these remarks  11  The results in Table 3 mean that when countries implemented reforms that increased the independence of their prudential regulator and/or supervisor, non-performing loans as a proportion of total lending decreased.  Greater regulatory independence increased financial stability.     But did greater regulatory independence come at a price of less efficient banks or slower credit growth, a version of what is sometime referred to “as the stability of the graveyard”?  It seems that it did not – see Table 4.    First, the authors replaced the non-performing loans with a measure of bank efficiency: the ratio between a bank’s expenses and its income.  The results show that the independence index does not have a statistically significant effect on bank efficiency contemporaneously or lagged by one year.    Second, they used the loan growth rate as a dependent variable. The result is similar: the index does not have a statistically similar effect on loan growth.    These results differ somewhat from others have found.  Dincer and Eichengreen (2013) find when the supervisor is independent some measures of bank credit are lower.  In contrast, Barth et al (2013b) find supervisory independence is associated with higher bank efficiency.  Table 4: Results for regressions of a bank efficiency ratio or loan growth on the Regulatory-Supervisory Independence Index   Dependent variable  Bank efficiency ratio (a) Loan growth rate Regulatory-Supervisory Independence Index 1.083 (0.992) 0.027 (0.022) Regulatory-Supervisory Independence Index lagged by one year 0.155 (0.367) 0.004 (0.015) Observations 30,698 30,698 Adjusted R2 0.737 0.105 (a) Defined as (non-interest expense before foreclosed property expense + amortisation of intangibles + goodwill impairments) as a percentage of (net interest income + non-interest income).    Conclusion  In this speech, I have set out a framework for thinking about ideal post-EU institutional structure.  The ideal model involves independent regulators with mandates.  The evidence backs that independence of prudential regulation increases financial stability with no cost to efficiency.    
       All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 12        References  Antoniades, A and Calomiris, C W (2018), ‘Mortgage market credit conditions and US presidential elections’, NBER Working Paper 24459.   Agarwal, S, Lucca, D, Seru, A, and Trebbi, F (2014), ‘Inconsistent regulators: evidence from banking’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.129, pages 889-938.    Barth, J R, Lin, C, Ma, Y, Seade, J, and Song, F M (2013b), ‘Do bank regulation, supervision and monitoring enhance or impede bank efficiency?’, Journal of Banking & Finance, Vol.37(8), pages 2879-2892.  Barth, J R, Caprio, G and Levine, R (2013), ‘Bank regulation and supervision in 180 countries from 1999 to 2011’, NBER Working Paper 18733.  Ben-David, I, Cerulli, G, Fiordelisi, F, and Marquez-Ibanez, D (2018), ‘Seeking my supervisor: evidence from the centralization of banking supervision in Europe’, Mimeo.    Bodea, C and Hicks, R (2015), ‘Price stability and central bank independence: discipline, credibility, and democratic institutions’, International Organization, Vol.69(1), pages 35-61.  Dagher, J (2018), ‘Regulatory cycles: revisiting the political economy of financial crises’, IMF Working Paper WP/18/8  Dincer, N N and Eichengreen, B (2012), ‘The architecture and governance of financial supervision: sources and implications’, International Finance, Vol.15(3), pages 309-25.    Fraccaroli, N, Sowerbutts, R, and Whitworth, A (2019), ‘Does regulatory and supervisory independence affect financial stability’, Forthcoming.    Garriga, A C (2016), ‘Central bank independence in the world: a new data set’, International Interactions, Vol.42(5), pages 849-68.    Klomp, J and de Haan, J (2009), ‘Political institutions and economic volatility’, Journal of Financial Stability, Vol.5(4), pages 311-26.  
        All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 13  13      OECD (2016), Being an independent regulator, OECD Publishing.    Quintyn, M, and Taylor, M W (2002), ‘Regulatory and supervisory independence and financial stability’, IMF Working Paper WP/02/46.    
Olli Rehn: Economic effects of the corona crisis and measures bythe central banksSpeech by Mr Olli Rehn, Governor of the Bank of Finland, at the stakeholder event in connectionwith the publication of the Bank of Finland’s Annual Report, Bank of Finland, Helsinki, 20 March2020.*   *   *Accompanying slides of the speech.Distinguished guests, dear friends,Welcome to the publication of the Bank of Finland’s Annual Report and our stakeholder event. Inthese exceptional circumstances, I highly appreciate the opportunity to present our currenteconomic review to such a large audience of key stakeholders of the Bank of Finland. I would, ofcourse, rather have welcomed you here on the Bank’s premises in person, but we must nowmake do with this virtual dialogue. In this situation, it is of paramount importance to contain thespread of the virus to keep risk groups safe.At the Bank of Finland, we are always working to ensure as stable an economic foundation aspossible for households and businesses. Ensuring this now will require exceptional measures inresponse to the coronavirus and the sharp deterioration in global economic developments it willbring in its wake. I will get back to this in a short while.But to begin with, I will say a few words about the Bank of Finland’s own economy in 2019 andour sustainability programme.The Bank of Finland’s financial statements and profit distribution proposal were published today.We participate in the implementation of the euro area single monetary policy, which has in recentyears been reflected in an expansion of our balance sheet. This requires accumulation ofsufficient risk buffers. Even so, part of the Bank’s profits can still be transferred to the State. For2019, the amount transferred was EUR 188 million, as was decided today by the ParliamentarySupervisory Council. Since adoption of the euro in 1999, a total EUR 3 billion of the Bank ofFinland’s profits has been transferred to the State.***In December, the Bank of Finland launched a sustainability programme. The foundations of thecentral bank’s sustainability lie in our core functions. We promote the well-being of the Finnishpeople primarily by ensuring that the level of prices remains stable, the financial system isreliable and payment systems are secure.Sustainability also means listening closely to our stakeholders. Dialogue gives us the tools toconsider our own role in major social concerns, such as combatting climate change and thecontainment of over-indebtedness. During the next few years, the Bank of Finland will make astrong contribution not only to the management of climate risks but also to the promotion offinancial literacy among the general public. Both projects are part of our work on behalf of astable economy and sustainable growth. ***Distinguished guests,The rapid decline in production that the coronavirus has caused in China and elsewhere in recentweeks has rapidly and drastically reshaped the global economic outlook for the current year. 1 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
[Slide 2. Health first – damage to the economy must be mitigated]Protecting the health of the public must take precedence during a pandemic. However, thecontingency measures put in place to contain the virus also come with economic ramifications.Public authorities will inevitably play a key role in mitigating the economic damage, and that alsoapplies to the central bank.Countries have responded to the economic crisis with crisis packages that aim to support theirrespective economies in the coming months and limit the length of the crisis. The highesturgency lies in securing the funding to businesses and the liquidity of the banking and financialsystem. However, economic output and confidence are likely to make strides only when thegeneral public can see and trust that the pandemic is getting under control or, at least, that it canbe controlled.[Slide 3. Chinese economy contracted sharply in January and February]At this time, the economic outlook can only be examined by looking at different alternativescenarios, as there is no historical precedent for current events. For the calculations in the firstscenario, one can make use of statistical data on developments in China between January andFebruary. Output contracted sharply during this period. It is likely that we will see significantdeclines in aggregate output in other countries as well when the statistical data for Marchbecomes available.Global financial markets have seen exceptional volatility in recent weeks, especially as thevaluations of risky investment assets have fallen. The uncertainty about what comes next isprofound.The depth and duration of the recession will largely be determined by how the virus spreads, butalso by the economic policy measures taken in response to the crisis. What gives hope is thefact that China, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Singapore have made significant progress in controllingthe epidemic. This has been achieved through comprehensive and extensive measures.Businesses will feel the economic impact of the coronavirus across a broad front, both in termsof production difficulties and in terms of reduced demand for their products. The issue of workingcapital finance may prove existential for many businesses. Many households, in turn, will bestressed as the risk of unemployment increases and incomes fall. The difficulties of banks’clients will also have consequences for the banks’ own operations, which may be reflected inbanks’ own access to funding, including the terms of funding.[Slide 4. Finnish economy falling into recession]The Finnish economy, too, is falling into recession. The Bank of Finland published two alternativescenarios on Wednesday [18 March] on the near-term economic outlook. In these scenarios,Finnish GDP is seen to contract by 1.5–4% in 2020. Exports in particular will decline. Theeconomy may end up in a deep recession if household consumption also falls substantially anddomestic supply chains become disrupted.The immediate economic impact of the restrictions placed on personal mobility and otheractivities will, however, prove temporary. Nevertheless, longer-term effects may follow if asufficient number of businesses, banks or other financial sector participants find themselves indifficulties. The threat is bankruptcy, unemployment and welfare loss. This is why the economicpolicies to be decided in the coming weeks are so important.[Slide 5. The ECB’s monetary policy measures of 12 March]At its meeting last week, the Governing Council of the ECB decided to conduct, temporarily,additional longer-term refinancing operations (LTROs) to provide immediate liquidity support to 2 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
the euro area financial system. The Governing Council decided to apply considerably morefavourable terms during the period June 2020 to June 2021 to all targeted longer-term refinancing(TLTRO III) operations outstanding during that time. The Governing Council decided to add atemporary envelope of additional net asset purchases of EUR 120 billion until the end of the year,ensuring a strong contribution from the private sector purchase programmes.Other central banks have also taken similar action. Another important decision for the euro areawas the joint agreement by central banks on 15 March to lower the pricing on US dollar fundinggranted via the standing US dollar liquidity swap arrangements and to extend the maturity of USdollar liquidity operations. Euro area banks can apply for this US dollar funding via theEurosystem’s standing facilities, and they have already done so.[Slide 6. ECB Banking Supervision measures in response to the corona virus]The ECB is responsible for banking supervision in the euro area. Last week, the ECB’s BankingSupervision authority also responded to the rapidly changing situation, announcing measuresthat will provide its directly supervised banks flexibility in the fulfilment of certain additional capitaland liquidity requirements. This also applies to those Finnish banks that are directly supervisedby the ECB. In Finland, the Board of the Financial Supervisory Authority (FIN-FSA) decided on 17March to lower by one percentage point the capital requirements that are subject to nationaldecision-making. These measures will increase banks’ ability to provide credit to the realeconomy during the pandemic.The purpose of both the monetary policy decisions and those involving banking supervision is tomaintain favourable funding conditions for businesses and households. During the pandemic,many businesses are faced with a situation in which a rapid decline in income may lead toproblems even though their operating conditions would be good once the economic situation hasreturned to normal. In such cases access to funding is vital.[Slide 7. The ECB Governing Council’s monetary policy decisions of 18 MarchOn Wednesday 18 March, the Governing Council of the ECB decided on additional measures tomitigate the economic impacts of the corona virus crisis.We decided to launch a new Pandemic Emergency Purchase Programme (PEPP), which willhave an overall envelope of EUR 750 billion. Purchases will be conducted in a flexible mannerand until the end of 2020 and will include all the asset categories eligible under the existing assetpurchase programme (APP). Securities issued by the Greek government will also be eligible forpurchases under the PEPP.The Governing Council is also fully prepared to increase the size of its asset purchaseprogrammes and adjust their composition.In addition to this new asset purchase programme, the Governing Council decided on 18 Marchto expand the range of eligible assets under the corporate sector purchase programme (CSPP).It also announced its decision to ease the collateral standards of its credit operations.The ECB Governing Council on Wednesday underlined that it will do everything necessary withinits mandate to support all citizens of the euro area through this extremely challenging time.“There are no limits to our commitment to the euro,” ECB President Christine Lagarde summedup rather aptly. [Slide 8. Purchases of commercial paper]On March 15, the Bank of Finland decided to recommence purchases of Finnish commercialpaper. In this way, we increase the supply of funding to Finnish businesses. Even thoughcommercial paper is used for funding purposes mainly by larger companies, the purchases will 3 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
also indirectly ease the funding conditions for smaller companies. This is because they will freeup banks’ credit lines for smaller businesses.The Bank of Finland decided yesterday, due to strong demand, to double the volume of theprogramme, in other words to extend the maximum volume of the commercial paper purchasesto EUR 1 billion.Overall, as regards the economic policy action taken during the acute phase of the corona viruscrisis, it is important that the economic policy measures are implemented swiftly and that theyare targeted precisely at those affected by the crisis.Central to this are not only the decisions of the central bank but also, naturally, those taken bygovernments. Fiscal policy will benefit greatly from European coordination. Exports or theavailability of foreign input cannot be stimulated via domestic measures, but they CAN bestimulated by introducing joint European measures. A European fiscal policy stimulusprogramme would certainly benefit a small open economy like Finland.In Finland and elsewhere, the most burning issue is to alleviate the cash crisis of SMEs,particularly micro enterprises, and to prevent bankruptcies. For this purpose, the Governmenttook a decision to extend the powers of the Export Credit Agency Finnvera and to increase theState Pension Fund of Finland’s investments on commercial paper markets. It is essential thateven the smallest businesses are provided with information and services on government loansand other instruments available to them to help them weather the economic recession.Distinguished guests,Originally, the topic of this stakeholder meeting was intended to be the ECB’s strategy review.Reflection on the strategy is likely to be overshadowed in the coming months by themanagement of the current acute crisis, but in the longer term it will play a key role in thesuccess of the Monetary Union. We will revert to this important topic at a later date.[Slide 9 Summary]Dear friends,We are living through a very exceptional spring. The economy and society as a whole are largelyat a standstill. The most important thing now is to protect those whose health is threatened bythe pandemic.At the same time, it is important to protect people from the economic effects of the pandemic.Now output is contracting sharply in many countries, including Finland.Although economic contraction is inevitable in the short term, a sharp increase in bankruptciesand unemployment can be avoided. In this respect, the main responsibility lies with theGovernment, but to alleviate the damage we need broad cooperation and swift measures, in thespirit of a comprehensive national effort. Labour market organisations can contribute to makingaccommodation fast and fair and help businesses survive and save jobs. Banks and pensioncompanies can contribute by securing access to funding for businesses and helping householdssurvive the worst times.In this comprehensive national effort, banks operating in Finland can also be expected toparticipate fully, particularly as their capital requirements have just been eased and the terms ofcredit obtained via Eurosystem refinancing operations are now very favourable.***But, of course, the central banks also have their own responsibilities and mandates. 4 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
The key issue is to secure the financing of companies and households. This is the aim of theECB’s extensive measures, the Bank of Finland’s purchases on the corporate commercial papermarket and the Financial Supervisory Authority’s decision to lower capital requirements. InEurope, the pandemic is a problem for everyone. The difficulties are not the result of recklesseconomic management in any country. What is needed now is European solidarity. This pertainsto both the ECB’s activities and the management of the public finances. A common fiscalstimulus is also in Finland’s interest.The current crisis is global and also concerns a wide range of Finnish businesses, employeesand households. In responding to the crisis, cooperation is of paramount importance:cooperation between central banks, cooperation between European countries, and cooperationbetween domestic policymakers.Finland has in the past come through even more difficult situations. I am confident that, despitethe need to keep a physical distance from each other, we in Finland are ready and able for suchnational cooperation as is necessary to overcome this crisis and alleviate the damage followingin its wake, in a just and fair way.Thank you! 5 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
Luis de Guindos: Interview with Telediario 2, Televisión EspañolaInterview with Mr Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, and Telediario2, Televisión Española, conducted by Mr Carlos Franganillo on 19 March 2020.*   *   *One way or another, this massive asset purchase programme will be of particular help tothose countries that have been deeply affected, such as Spain or Italy, to ensure thatspreads don’t widen dramatically at this critical time.It will help all euro area countries. Some were in a weaker position; their public finances werealso more vulnerable than others. But what the ECB will not allow is fragmentation of any kind inthe sovereign debt markets and a return to the nightmare caused by widened spreads. We aredealing with a huge health crisis, there is a severe economic crisis and we are going to ensurethat it does not result in some kind of financial crisis or debt crisis. This is what we are going toavoid because the ECB is at the service of the European people.The European Central Bank has said that it will do whatever needs to be done to combatthis crisis. Does the ECB have more weapons at its disposal for the weeks or monthsahead if the situation deteriorates?We can always do more. As you mentioned earlier in your news item, our commitment knows nolimits. We will do whatever is necessary to ensure that this pandemic, which is having a massiveeconomic impact, does not turn into a debt crisis or a crisis of the financial system. We will notallow this to happen. We are dealing with a situation which requires us to act with extremeintensity.You have said that the measures taken by the Spanish government and other Europeangovernments are appropriate. But you have also hinted recently that the EuropeanUnion has perhaps not responded quite as effectively. Are you afraid that a crisis of thiskind could take its toll on the European project?Let’s hope not. The ECB has already acted. Basically what remains is for Member States also toact and continue to act through their fiscal policies. And we need a pan-European response. Weneed a coordinated EU fiscal policy response. I am sure that this is what will happen in the end.The ECB cannot be the only policy tool used from an economic standpoint. Monetary policycannot be the only instrument employed. I am certain that Member States will do somethingabout this and they will adopt a coordinated position in terms of the fiscal policy instrumentsemployed by the EU in response to this huge crisis. The economic impact will be enormous. Wejust hope that it will be temporary. We have to take all the necessary measures to ensure thatour economic fabric is not destroyed, to ensure that businesses that are solvent can survive andthat once this urgent health crisis is over, they can return to normal.You have talked about a temporary crisis, a sort of pause. The Spanish government hastalked about the same thing. But do you think this is how things will turn out or do youthink the economic consequences for Europe could be more severe for longer?This will depend on how long the health crisis lasts and, to be honest, I wouldn’t dare to guesshow long it might last. What happened in China is a leading indicator. What’s happening to usnow happened two months ago in China and now they are starting to get back to normal.Obviously this is something that gives us hope: we can get through this. From an economicperspective, we have to look for instruments to get us through this period at the lowest economiccost and, of course, with no financial cost from a debt market perspective. 1 / 1BIS central bankers' speeches
Fabio Panetta: Interview with TG1Interview by Mr Fabio Panetta, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank,with TG1, conducted by Mr Gennaro Pellino on 19 March 2020.*   *   *Only a week ago, one sentence suggested we were looking at an abrupt change ofdirection. What has changed in a week?I don’t think it’s particularly useful to dwell on one sentence – especially one which PresidentLagarde herself quickly corrected. I believe that our actions and our policies are clearlydemonstrated by our decision yesterday, namely our strong determination to provide support tothe Italian and the European economy. We made available €1,100 billion, a vast sum, to supportthe financial markets. The famous spread has declined significantly today. This measure comeson top of the package we agreed last week, when we made available €3,000 billion to the banks,at very low cost, at very low lending rates, but only on the condition that banks use that funding tofinance the real economy, households, firms and government efforts to deal with the publichealth emergency and support the European and the Italian economy.What does the ECB want to achieve now with this new liquidity issuance?The coronavirus pandemic will reduce economic growth in Italy and Europe by some percentagepoints. Our actions aim to prevent the hardships and struggles that European citizens andhouseholds are currently enduring from being compounded by the economic difficulty that couldresult from a recession. We have taken decisive action to prevent such developments andPresident Lagarde has stated that there are no limits to the action we will take to ensure that theEuropean economy is able to continue on a path of growth.What can European citizens expect now from Europe and the European Union?Italian and European citizens can expect what they are entitled to, namely strong, decisive,unified and coordinated action by national governments and European institutions, including theEuropean Central Bank, to alleviate the hardships and economic difficulties that they willinevitably face as a result of the pandemic. We will be in the front line of this action. PresidentLagarde has stated that the European Central Bank will continue to act decisively until theemergency related to the coronavirus has been overcome. 1 / 1BIS central bankers' speeches
Philip Lowe: SpeechSpeech by Mr Philip Lowe, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, Sydney, 19 March 2020.*   *   *Good afternoon.The Reserve Bank Board met yesterday and decided on a comprehensive package to helpsupport jobs, incomes and businesses as the Australian economy deals with the coronavirus. Iwould like to use this opportunity to explain this package and to answer your questions.We are clearly living in extraordinary and challenging times. The coronavirus is first and foremosta very major public health problem. But it has also become a major economic problem, which ishaving deep ramifications for financial systems around the world. The closure of borders andsocial distancing measures are affecting us all and they are changing the way we live.Understandably, our communities and our financial markets are both having trouble dealing witha rapidly unfolding situation that they have not seen before.As our country manages this difficult situation, it is important that we do not lose sight of the factthat we will come through this.At some point, the virus will be contained and our economy and our financial markets willrecover.Undeniably, what we are facing today is a very serious situation, but it is something that istemporary. As we deal with it as best we can, we also need to look to the other side when thingswill recover. When we do get to that other side, all those fundamentals that have made Australiasuch a successful and prosperous country will still be there. We need to remember that.To help us get to the other side, though, we need a bridge. Without that bridge, there will be moredamage, some of which will be permanent, to the economy and to people's lives.Building that bridge requires a concerted team effort, with us all pulling together in the country'sinterest. On the economic front, there is very close policy coordination between the AustralianGovernment, the Australian Treasury, the Reserve Bank and Australia's financial regulators. Weare all in close contact with one another and are working constructively together and we willcontinue to do so. This coordination is evident in the various policy statements today.Governments across Australia are playing their important role in building that bridge to therecovery, with the various fiscal initiatives from the Australian and state governments providingvery welcome support. Rightly, the focus is on supporting businesses and households who willsuffer a major hit to their incomes. It is increasingly clear that further help will be required on thisfront and the Australian Government has indicated that additional policy measures will beannounced shortly. Australian public finances are in good shape and the country's history ofprudent fiscal management gives us the capacity to respond now.The banks too have an important role to play in building that bridge to the recovery by supportingtheir customers. Without this support, it will be harder for us all to get to the other side inreasonable shape.Australia has a strong financial system, which is well placed to provide the needed support tobusinesses and households. The system has strong capital and liquidity positions and ourfinancial institutions have invested heavily in resilience. As APRA confirmed this afternoon in apublic statement, the current large buffers of capital and liquidity are able to be used to supportongoing lending to the economy. 1 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
The financial regulators have also confirmed that they are examining how the timing of variousregulatory initiatives might be adjusted to allow financial institutions to concentrate on theirbusinesses and work with their customers. APRA and ASIC both stand ready to assistinstitutions work through regulatory issues arising from the virus. The Council of FinancialRegulators is meeting again tomorrow and will also meet with the largest lenders to discuss howthey can support their customers and whether there are any regulatory impediments in the way.The Reserve Bank itself is also playing a role in building that bridge to the recovery. I will now turnto that.Our major focus is to support jobs, incomes and businesses, so that when the health crisisrecedes the country is well placed to recover strongly. Supporting small business over comingmonths is a particular priority.Prior to today's announcement, we had already taken several steps over recent days to supportthe Australian economy.Over the past week or so we have been injecting substantial extra liquidity into the financialsystem through our daily market operations. As part of this effort, we will be conducting one-month and three-month repo operations each day. We will also conduct repo operations of six-month maturity or longer at least weekly, as long as market conditions warrant. As a result ofthese liquidity operations, Exchange Settlement balances have increased from around $2.5billion a month ago to over $20 billion today.The Reserve Bank also stands ready to purchase Australian government bonds in the secondarymarket to support its smooth functioning. The government bond market is a key market for theAustralian financial system, because government bonds provide the pricing benchmark for manyfinancial assets. Our approach here is similar in concept to our longstanding approach to theforeign exchange market, where we have been prepared to support smooth market functioningwhen liquidity conditions are highly stressed. We now stand ready to do the same in the bondmarket and we are working in close cooperation on this with the Australian Office of FinancialManagement (AOFM).In addition to these previously announced measures, today's package has four elements. Theyare: a reduction in the cash rate to 0.25 per cent; a target of 0.25 per cent for the yield on 3-yeargovernment bonds; a term funding facility to support credit to businesses, particularly small andmedium-sized businesses; and an adjustment to the interest rate on accounts that financialinstitutions hold at the RBA.I will discuss each of these in turn.1. A Further Reduction in the Cash Rate to ¼ Per CentThis brings the cumulative decline over the past year to 1¼ percentage points. This is asubstantial easing of monetary policy, which is boosting the cash flow of businesses and thehousehold sector as a whole. It is also helping our trade-exposed industries through theexchange rate channel. At the same time, though, low interest rates do have negativeconsequences for some people, especially those relying on interest income. The Reserve BankBoard has discussed these consequences extensively, but the evidence is that lower interestrates do benefit the community as a whole, although I acknowledge that the effects are uneven.With this decision today, the policy rates set by the Reserve Bank of Australia, the United StatesFederal Reserve, the Bank of England and the Reserve Bank of New Zealand are all effectively at¼ per cent. Each of us are using all the scope we have with interest rates to support oureconomies through a very challenging period. 2 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
At its meeting yesterday, the Board also agreed that we would not increase the cash rate from itscurrent level until progress was made towards full employment and that we were confident thatinflation will be sustainably within the 2–3 per cent range. This means that we are likely to be atthis level of interest rates for an extended period.Before the coronavirus hit, we were expecting to make progress towards full employment andthe inflation target, although that progress was expected to be only very gradual. Recent eventshave obviously changed the situation and we are now likely to remain short of those objectivesfor somewhat longer.I am not able to provide you with an updated set of economic forecasts. The situation is just toofluid. But we are expecting a major hit to economic activity and incomes in Australia that will lastfor a number of months. We are also expecting significant job losses. The scale of these losseswill depend on the ability of businesses to keep workers on during this difficult period. We sawduring the global financial crisis how flexibility in working arrangements limited job losses and thisbenefited the entire community. I hope the same is true in the months ahead.It is also important to repeat that we are expecting a recovery once the virus is contained. Thetiming and strength of that recovery will depend in part upon how successful we are, as a nation,in building that bridge to the other side. When that recovery does come, it will be supported bythe low level of interest rates. We will maintain the current setting of interest rates until a strongrecovery is in place and the achievement of our objectives is clearly in sight.2. A Target Yield on 3-year Australian Government BondsOver recent decades, the Reserve Bank's practice has been to target the cash rate, which formsthe anchor point for the risk-free term structure. We are now extending and complementing thisby also targeting a risk-free interest rate further out along the yield curve.In particular, we are targeting the yield on 3-year Australian Government Securities (AGS) and wehave set this target at around 0.25 per cent, the same as the cash rate. Over recent weeks, theyield on 3-year AGS has averaged 0.45 per cent, so this represents a material reduction.We have chosen the three-year horizon as it influences funding rates across much of theAustralian economy and is an important rate in financial markets. It is also consistent with theBoard's expectation that the cash rate will remain at its current level for some years, but notforever.To achieve this yield target, we will be conducting regular auctions in the bond market. Wepublished some technical details earlier today and we will keep the market informed of ouroperations. Our first auction will be tomorrow. As part of this program, our intention is topurchase bonds of different maturities given the high level of substitutability between bonds. Weare also prepared to buy semi-government securities to achieve the target and to help facilitatethe smooth functioning of Australia's bond market.I want to make it clear that our purchases will be in the secondary market and we will not bepurchasing bonds directly from the Government.I would also like to emphasise that we are not seeking to have the three-year yield identically at25 basis points each and every day. There will be some natural variation, and it does not makesense to counter that. It may also take some time for yields to fall from their current level to 25basis points.I understand why many people will view this as quantitative easing – or QE. This is becausethere is a quantitative aspect to what we are doing – achieving this target will involve the ReserveBank buying bonds and an expansion of our balance sheet. 3 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
But our emphasis is not on the quantities – we are not setting objectives for the quantity andtiming of bonds that we will buy, as some other central banks have done. How much we need topurchase, and when we need to enter the market, will depend upon market conditions andprices.Rather than quantities or the size of our balance sheet, our focus is very much on the price ofmoney and credit. Our objective here is to provide support for low funding costs across the entireeconomy. By lowering this important benchmark interest rate, we will add to the downwardpressure on borrowing costs for financial institutions, households and businesses. We areprepared to transact in whatever quantities are necessary to achieve this objective.We expect to maintain the target for three-year yields until progress is being made towards ourgoals of full employment and the inflation target. Our expectation, though, is that the yield targetwill be removed before the cash rate is increased.3. A Term Funding Facility for the Banking System with Support for Business Credit,Especially to Small and Medium-sized BusinessesThe scheme has two broad objectives.The first is to lower funding costs for the entire banking system so that the cost of credit tohouseholds and businesses is low. In this regard, it will complement the target for the three-yearyield on AGS.The second objective is to provide an incentive for lenders to support credit to businesses,especially small and medium-sized businesses. This is a priority area for us. Many smallbusinesses are going to find the coming months very difficult as their sales dry up and theysupport their staff. Assisting small businesses through this period will help us make that bridge tothe other side when the recovery takes place. If Australia has lost lots of otherwise viablebusinesses through this period, making that recovery will be harder and we will all pay the pricefor that. So it is important that we address this.Under this new facility, authorised deposit-taking institutions (ADIs) in total will have access to atleast $90 billion in funding. ADIs will be able to borrow from the Reserve Bank an amountequivalent to 3 per cent of their existing outstanding credit to Australian businesses andhouseholds. ADIs will be able to draw on these funds up until the end of September this year.Lenders will also be able to borrow additional funds from the Reserve Bank if they increase creditto business this year. For every extra dollar lent to large business, lenders will have access to anadditional dollar of funding from the Reserve Bank. For every extra dollar of loans to small andmedium-sized businesses they will have access to an additional five dollars. These funds can bedrawn upon up until the end of March next year. There is no extra borrowing allowance foradditional housing loans.The funding from the Reserve Bank will be for three years at a fixed interest rate of 0.25 per cent,which is substantially below lenders' current funding costs. Institutions accessing this schemewill need to provide the usual collateral to the Reserve Bank, with haircuts applying. The firstdrawings under this facility will be possible no later than four weeks from today.This scheme is similar to that introduced by the Bank of England. Unlike the Bank of England'sscheme, though, the interest rate is fixed for the term of the funding. This is consistent with ourview that the cash rate is likely to stay at its current level for some time. Another difference withthe Bank of England's scheme is that we have not included a higher interest rate if creditcontracts. While a decline in credit would be undesirable, including a penalty may act as adisincentive for institutions to take part in the scheme. 4 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
We are encouraging all ADIs to use the term funding facility to help support their customers. Iwelcome APRA's confirmation this afternoon that it also supports ADIs using this scheme. I alsowelcome the Australian Government's announcement that it will support the markets for asset-backed securities through the AOFM. This support is important as it will help non-bank financialinstitutions and small lenders to continue to provide credit to Australian households andbusinesses.4. An Adjustment to the Interest Rate on Exchange Settlement BalancesUnder our longstanding framework, the RBA operates a corridor system around the cash rate.Under that system, the balances that banks hold with the RBA overnight in Exchange Settlementaccounts earn an interest rate 25 basis points below the cash rate. And on the other side of thecorridor, in the event that a bank needed to borrow from the RBA overnight, it would be charged25 basis points above the cash rate.Under this arrangement and with the cash rate now at 25 basis points, the interest rate onExchange Settlement balances would have been zero. We have decided to increase this to 10basis points. We are not making any change to the arrangements for the top of the corridor.This adjustment to the corridor reflects the fact that there will be a significant increase in thebalances held in Exchange Settlement accounts due to the combined effect of the Bank'senhanced liquidity operations, bond purchases and term funding program. Maintaining a zerointerest rate on these balances would increase the costs to the banking system. In the currentenvironment, this would be unhelpful.The increase in settlement balances is also expected to change the way that the cash marketoperates. In other countries, where there have been large increases in balances at the centralbank, the cash rate equivalent has drifted below the target and transaction volumes in the cashmarket have declined. It is likely that we will see the same outcome in Australia. The ReserveBank will continue to monitor the cash market closely and is prepared to adjust arrangements ifthe situation requires.So these are the four measures announced earlier this afternoon. Together, they represent acomprehensive package to lower funding costs in Australia and support the supply of credit.Complementary initiatives by APRA and the AOFM are also working towards those sameobjectives.The term funding scheme and the three-year yield target are both significant policy developmentsthat would not have been under consideration in normal times. They both carry financial andother risks for the Reserve Bank and they both represent significant interventions by the Bank inAustralia's financial markets.The Reserve Bank Board did not take these decisions lightly. But in the context of extraordinarytimes and consistent with our broad mandate to promote the economic welfare of the people ofAustralia, we are seeking to play our full role in building that bridge to the time when the recoverytakes place. By doing all that we can to lower funding costs in Australia and support the supply ofcredit to business, we will help our economy and financial system get through this difficult period.Thank you for listening and I am here to answer your questions. 5 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
Joachim Wuermeling: The European financial market after BrexitDebate by Prof Joachim Wuermeling, Member of the Executive Board of the DeutscheBundesbank, at the Representation of the State of Hessen to the European Union, Brussels, 11March 2020.*   *   *1 IntroductionLadies and gentlemen,When I look at the current state of European banking supervision in general, I am very happy withwhat I see. Even though the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) was launched only around sixyears ago, it is already hard to imagine a world without it.While there is certainly always room for improvement, European supervisors have the tools andthe scope necessary to safeguard the efficiency and stability of individual financial institutionsand the financial system as a whole.Besides this structural observation, I would like to briefly address banking and supervisorydevelopments related to the coronavirus.At present, there is no indication that the functioning of the financial and banking system inGermany or the financing of the real economy are at risk.Since the financial crisis in 2008 we have made significant progress. Qualitative and quantitativerequirements for capital and liquidity have been strengthened substantially. In aggregate, capitaland liquidity buffers of banks are much higher than twelve years ago. Indeed, the framework forbanks’ capital contains several „breathing“ buffers such as the Capital Conservation Buffer(CCoB), the Countercyclical Capital Buffer (CCyB) or the Pillar 2 Guidance (P2G). These bufferswould be available as a cushion in a severe economic downturn.If necessary, the supervisory system provides sufficient leeway and flexibility to react to apotential worsening of economic data. However, I am strictly opposed to measures which woulddistort the correct assessment of risks.While the current situation is certainly challenging, this doesn’t change my overall assessmentthat European supervisors are well equipped to dealing with it. However, coming back to mystructural considerations, we shouldn’t take this situation for granted. Indeed, looking at severalstructural developments, I believe that our supervisory capabilities need to be protected. Andplease allow me to extend the scope of this speech somewhat beyond the title.I see three developments that could restrict our supervisory capabilities:Brexit and the subsequent restructuring of financial relations;Bigtech companies and their increasing role in the banking sector;And a potentially lenient approach to implementing Basel III.My message today is that, in order to ensure strong and effective supervision going forward,regulators and legislators need to protect the achievements.Now I would like to discuss these three developments and how they could affect the supervisorysphere. I will start with Brexit.2 Brexit and the subsequent restructuring of financial relations 1 / 6BIS central bankers' speeches
European supervisors, including the Bundesbank, have long warned of a risk to their ability tosupervise that could arise from banks relocating after Brexit.There was a risk that banks moving from the UK to the EU-27 could try to obtain Europeanlicences by only opening small, letterbox-style branches in Europe with limited personnel andlimited relevance to the day-to-day business of their group.Consequently, these institutions would enter the European financial market without actually beingpart of the European supervisory sphere and without being sufficiently independent from theirparent companies.However, thanks to the clear stance of European supervisors, this risk has not materialised.Early on, the SSM made it clear that no empty shell companies would be tolerated in Europe. Itwas pointed out at every occasion that financial institutions would only be granted licences ifcritical functions of their business, including risk management, were carried out on the continentand therefore within the jurisdiction of European supervisors.As long as the SSM continues to resolutely implement its zero-tolerance policy on empty shellcompanies, financial institutions operating under a European licence do not pose a threat to ourability to supervise.Instead, I am more concerned about financial institutions that don’t have a European licence.So far, around 300 institutions have been granted new licences as a result of Brexit. However, atotal of 5,500 financial firms are registered in London. This means that the majority have nodesire to obtain a European licence at all.Some of them will try to rely on passive provision of services. Although investment banks inLondon are not allowed to actively acquire customers in the EU-27 after Brexit, they can actfreely if European customers go to London. However, after Brexit, these financial intermediaries,i.e. the banks based in London, are no longer subject to EU rules and supervision.Financial ties between London and the EU-27 are very strong. One-third of the EU’s capitalmarket activities take place in London: 85 percent of interest rate swaps are traded London; 37percent of global foreign exchange trading is conducted in London, while only 11 percent iscarried out in the EU. In fact, half of the European Central Bank’s bond purchases are carried outin London.While financial ties remain close, regulatory ties have been cut by Brexit. Whether Europeanbanking regulations, regulations on money laundering, or consumer protection – all of this willessentially be at risk of being suspended.Financial institutions that are highly relevant for financing the European economy and providingfinancial services to European customers are now beyond the scope of our supervisory andregulatory powers.Some British policymakers have already voiced their opinions that London could use regulatorydifferences to its advantage in future.This could be seen as an announcement that rules for banks may be softened, which wouldmean that the banking system as a whole would not be as stable as it ought to be under EUrules.Let us be clear: This could be the announcement to reap the benefits of regulatory arbitrage andstart a new race to the bottom. In other words, our future financial stability will also depend in parton the behaviour of supervisors and legislators in London – even in times of crisis. This is amatter of concern to me. 2 / 6BIS central bankers' speeches
The solution is clear: we need to strengthen the EU as a financial centre. We need anindependent capital supply and our own channels to global markets. EU policy has never aimedtowards this goal so far. There has been no industrial strategy for the financial sector. It wasnever necessary, because we had everything we needed with London.The financial markets on the continent are strong, but not strong enough. Highly controversialprojects such as the banking union, including a deposit guarantee scheme, must therefore be re-examined; they are now taking on even greater strategic importance than they had before Brexit.Only if the EU succeeds in strengthening its own financial markets and thereby reducing itsdependence on London will European regulators and supervisors continue to be able to ensureeffective and stable financial markets in the EU.3 Bigtech companies and their increasing role in the banking sectorThe second potential threat to our supervisory capabilities also comes from new entrants into thebanking sector. I am talking about fintech and bigtech companies as well as critical third-partyproviders such as cloud services.These new entrants into the world of finance and banking are putting the traditional value chainsof the banking sector into question. Established banks have now fully recognised the magnitudeand gravity of this threat.However, a less prominent topic of discussion is the challenges these developments pose forregulators – and for our supervisory sphere. We must therefore ask ourselves: could these newplayers enter the financial sector without coming into our supervisory sphere as well?If we take a rather simple example of a bigtech or fintech company that acts as a fully fledgedbank right away, then we have nothing to worry about. In this scenario, the company would needto ask for a licence accompanied by the proper supervision.However, new challengers don’t usually enter the financial sector in legal terms by founding abank that’s slightly more digitalised. Instead, they tend to deconstruct the traditional value chain ofbanking and offer only a few selected services, such as verification of customer identities, creditbrokering, or account information services.In this case, the activities carried out need to be assessed based on existing regulations andthen supervised accordingly. The activities define which entities in the ecosystem are to belicenced and supervised – and in what way.In many cases fintech companies (as well as bigtech companies and cloud service providers)cooperate with established banks, for example by means of outsourcing arrangements.This development poses various challenges for supervisors:First, outsourcing arrangements can become very complex, which means that assessing howthe supervised institution manages them can be a highly complex task for supervisors.Second, as the most recent reporting requirements are still being implemented, supervisorscurrently find it challenging to assess potential concentration risks.Third, there is currently no direct obligation for third-party providers (including multi-client serviceproviders) to comply with the regulatory requirements imposed on banks.The same goes for the requirements relating to proper business organisation, including theadequacy and effectiveness of risk management. 3 / 6BIS central bankers' speeches
Currently, the outsourcing institution has to ensure that a third-party provider complies with therelevant requirements. However, this might be quite challenging in practice. The question here iswhether we might need direct regulatory requirements for critical third-party providers in thefuture.Further problems can arise when outsourcing arrangements or business models in general arecross-border and different regulatory requirements lead to inconsistent classifications of abusiness in different jurisdictions. International harmonisation of the respective rules as well asinternational cooperation among supervisors are the key to dealing with these cases.In the EU, we have already come a long way with the latest revision of the European BankingAuthority (EBA) outsourcing guidelines, which further harmonises requirements across the EU. Itwill improve the information supervisors have for assessing potential concentration risks. And itclarifies supervisory expectations towards outsourcing contracts.National implementation of these guidelines is underway. The next step is to collaborateregarding an appropriate oversight framework for monitoring critical service providers in line withthe Joint Advice of the European Supervisory Authorities.But with regard to other activities of bigtech companies in the financial sector – most notably theannouncement of global “stablecoins” in recent months – the EU must continue to push forstrong international cooperation in order to ensure consistent and comprehensive supervisionand oversight of bigtech-driven ecosystems.Globally, more work is needed in terms of harmonisation. The Basel Committee on BankingSupervision (BCBS) should play a central role here.In fact, the Committee met just two weeks ago to discuss its future priorities, its structure and itsprocesses. Without going into too much detail, I can say that the Committee is well aware of thechallenges posed by new competitors in the banking system. The Committee will have to decidehow to define the scope of its work going forward. The traditional understanding of which playersbelong to the banking sector and should thus be subject to banking regulation might not befuture-proof.4 A potentially lenient approach to implementing Basel IIILet’s turn to my third example: Basel III.While Basel III is finalised, its European implementation is not. The Basel III finalisation package,which is the second and last part of the overall reform package, still needs to be implemented inseveral jurisdictions. In the EU, we are awaiting a proposal by the European Commission in thenext few months.The reform is already facing headwinds, especially since an estimation by the European BankingAuthority last year predicted that Basel III will have a significant impact on capital requirements forsome EU banks.Since then – if not before – the financial industry has been calling for a more lenientimplementation of the reforms, including proposals for clear deviations from the Baselframework.Following such proposals would weaken financial stability in the EU – there’s no question aboutthat. But it would also weaken our supervisory firepower.To do their job effectively, supervisors need a strong set of rules. A strong set of rules needslegitimacy. The international consistency of banking regulation that the Basel Committee hasachieved contributes tremendously to this legitimacy. 4 / 6BIS central bankers' speeches
It provides an international level playing field, thereby quashing any arguments that regulationcreates a competitive disadvantage.Unilaterally terminating this common understanding would put the legitimacy of this successfulinternational framework at risk.Its credibility would also be weakened if the Basel framework, which is based on the lessonsfrom the last financial crisis, were to be called into question at the national implementation stage.In the long run, a less stringent implementation of Basel III would certainly limit supervisorycapacity. That’s why it is important that European legislators don’t pick up on proposals forintroducing loopholes into the Basel III reforms.I would like to spell out a clear warning in this respect: Do not deviate fundamentally from theagreement we accepted!Besides potential loopholes, there is another aspect of banking regulation that can limitsupervisory capacity: regulation used as a tool for non-financial stability objectives.This occasionally happens when political goals other than financial stability are pursued throughfinancial regulation. Examples of this are calls to introduce green supporting or ESG factors intobanking regulation as well as the existing factors that support SME or infrastructure funding.To be clear: politicians in their function as legislators have every right to pursue certain policygoals and it is not for central bankers or supervisors to try and prevent them from doing so.But we do have an obligation to sound the alarm when political goals undermine our supervisorycapabilities and thus make it more difficult for us to do the job we are assigned to do. When risk-oriented financial regulation is used as a tool to pursue other political goals, supervisory activitiestake a back seat to political considerations.For the implementation of Basel III and European banking regulation in general, this means thatregulation must remain fully risk-oriented and sufficiently principle-based. Therefore, animplementation that adheres strictly to the Basel rules is crucial.At first glance, overly prescriptive rules like applying certain adjustment factors to capitalrequirements might seem to delineate the supervisory framework more clearly. But, in reality,they replace supervisory judgement with sweeping judgements, thereby limiting supervisorypowers.5 ConclusionLadies and gentlemen,I have discussed three developments that threaten the supervisory sphere: Brexit, bigtechcompanies, and a lenient approach to implementing Basel III.To protect the supervisory sphere, the following measures are called for:The SSM should continue to resolutely implement its zero-tolerance policy on empty shellcompanies. The EU should strengthen Europe as a financial centre to reduce itsdependence on London.Both in the EU and internationally, requirements in the context of outsourcing and other typesof cooperation between banks and non-banks should be harmonised further. We also needto assess to what extent rules should apply directly to third-party providers, and push forstrong international cooperation to effectively supervise cross-border financial ecosystems.The EU should fully implement Basel III and resist calls to introduce loopholes. It should keep 5 / 6BIS central bankers' speeches
regulation risk-oriented and principle-based.Thank you for listening. 6 / 6BIS central bankers' speeches
Yakiv Smolii: National Bank of Ukraine press briefing - monetarypolicy statementSpeech by Mr Yakiv Smolii, Governor of the National Bank of Ukraine, at a press briefing onmonetary policy, Kyiv, 12 March 2020.*   *   *Dear colleagues,Please be informed that the Board of the National Bank of Ukraine has decided to cut the keypolicy rate to 10% per annum effective 13 March 2020.The NBU continues its monetary policy easing, as predicted, in order to bring inflation back to itstarget range of 5% +/- 1 pp and to support economic growth in Ukraine amid a cooling globaleconomy.What inflation developments followed the last monetary policy meeting?In the first months of the year, inflationary pressures waned faster than we hadexpected. Consumer inflation slowed down to 3.2% yoy in January and to 2.4% yoy in February,which was faster than foreseen in the forecast trajectory. As a result, inflation is currently belowthe NBU’s medium-term target of 5% that is the level optimal for the development of the Ukrainianeconomy.A number of factors stand behind the faster disinflation.First, last year’s strengthening of the hryvnia impacted prices of goods, especially those whichare imported.Second, supply of some raw foods increased.Third, global energy prices dropped.These factors offset the effect of robust consumer demand, which was bolstered by the lastinggrowth in real household income. Growth in real wages accelerated to 12.5% in January, andgrowth rates of retail turnover continues to exceed 12%.What are the future inflation developments?In January the NBU forecast inflation at 4.8% as of the end of 2020, but this forecast maybe reviewed in April depending on further developments.So far, the global spread of the novel coronavirus has had a limited or neutral impact on theeconomy of Ukraine. Ukraine’s exports continue to rise. Further increases in physical volumes ofexports have more than offset certain declines in prices for some of the goods the countryexports. At the same time, import prices (especially energy prices) are declining even faster thanexport prices.The price environment on the crude oil market has been favorable for Ukraine even disregardingthe latest developments. In February, crude oil prices declined by 10%–15% yoy on average,European prices for natural gas fell by 50%, and metals prices dropped by 11%–12%. Prices forgrains and iron ore remained almost unchanged.Uncertainty over the spread of the novel coronavirus, and stronger turbulence on financial andcommodity markets saw the Ukrainian FX market respond with deteriorated sentiment and 1 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
increased nervousness. This has led to a sizeable increase in demand for foreign currency,which exceeded the supply, starting last week.The NBU has been active on the interbank foreign exchange market since last week in order tosmooth out large fluctuations of the exchange rate. This week alone, net FX sales by the NBUreached USD 700 million, and the central bank is ready to conduct more FX interventions ifnecessary. Despite the fact that the psychological factor is the only reason for the FX marketturmoil, it poses a risk of a deterioration in inflation expectations, which can later affect consumerprices. Although so far the global spread of the novel coronavirus has had little effect on economicgrowth and inflation in Ukraine, the NBU will most probably have to revise itsmacroeconomic forecasts in April. After all, the following consequences of the spread ofthe coronavirus have not yet impacted economic activity and inflation in Ukraine:the downward pressure on prices and a cooling of the global economymonetary policy easing by central banks of the leading economies and Ukraine’s tradingpartners in response to these processesmeasures taken by governments to prevent the spread of COVID-19.Apart from the drop in global prices caused by the coronavirus, disinflation in Ukraine will bedriven by the recent rise in competition between crude oil producers. This will keep energy pricesat record lows, which will also impact prices for Ukrainian exports.Overall, the effect of all these factors on economic growth and inflation in Ukraine will be mixed,adding to the uncertainty.What other factors did the NBU consider when making its monetary policy decisiontoday?The NBU Board continued to rely on the key assumption that cooperation with the IMFwill continue.Signing a new agreement with the IMF will make the Ukrainian economy less vulnerable in a timeof turbulent global markets and during a period of heavy public debt repayments. Investors’perception of Ukraine will also depend on Ukrainian court rulings on the responsibility andliabilities to the state of the former owners of insolvent banks.The risk arising from the global spread of the novel coronavirus could, if realized, drive the globaleconomy into a recession and cause a significant slowdown in the Ukrainian economy. Adramatic decline in global demand and investors’ revaluation of risks related to developingeconomies could negatively affect Ukraine’s external trade and make it more difficult for Ukraineto obtain financing.There are other significant risks. They include:an escalation of the military conflict in eastern Ukraine and new trade restrictions beingintroduced by Russiaa drop in the harvest of grain, fruit and vegetable crops in Ukraine in the wake of unfavorableweatherthe higher volatility of global food prices, driven by global climate change.Therefore, the NBU Board made its key policy rate decision when inflationary pressures weredecreasing faster than expected, and the economy needed further support. 2 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
In view of the above, the NBU Board continued its monetary policy easing cycle by cutting the keypolicy rate by 1 pp, to 10%, as envisaged by the central bank’s January forecast. What matters tothe NBU the most is that the cut will provide the necessary impetus to the economy, while alsonot preventing the central bank from achieving its inflation target, which is its priority.What will the NBU’s monetary policy stance be in future?As before, the NBU plans to decrease its key policy rate to 7% by the end of the currentyear.In deciding on the pace of key policy rate cuts to that level, the NBU will closely monitor:the spread of the coronavirus around the world and in Ukraine, and its impact on thedomestic and global economythe response of governments and central banks to these developmentsany progress achieved in negotiating a new aid agreement with the IMF, which will shape theexpectations of financial market participants, and determine the prices of Ukrainian assets.If there are favorable developments, and if the new Ukrainian government speeds up reform, theNBU will be able to ease its monetary policy more quickly.Conversely, if the above risks materialize, the NBU will respond quickly by deploying themonetary policy tools it has at its disposal.Thank you for your attention! 3 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
Timothy Lane: Money and payments in the digital ageRemarks by Mr Timothy Lane, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the CFA MontréalFinTech RDV2020, Montreal, Quebec, 25 February 2020.*   *   *IntroductionGood afternoon. Thank you very much for inviting me here today to share some thoughts on howtechnological innovations are transforming the world of money and payments.Technology has certainly changed every aspect of life. People now work, shop and stay in touchwith each other very differently than even 10 years ago.Technology is also changing the way Canadians pay for things. Digital payments in the form ofdebit, credit and prepaid cards are commonplace. We are also seeing mobile payments likeApple Pay and Google Pay, as well as the ability to send money by email. There is even limiteduse of cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin.The Bank of Canada is looking carefully at how money and payments are evolving. This isbecause one of our key public policy objectives is to help ensure Canadians can use theirpreferred methods of payment with confidence.New technologies in our payment systems mean new opportunities and benefits for consumers,businesses and financial institutions. But they also raise the potential for new risks to ourfinancial system.In my remarks today, I want to talk about how the Bank of Canada is responding to this evolvingenvironment.And part of our response involves looking at whether a case could—or should—be made in thefuture for a digital currency issued by the Bank of Canada. So I will share our contingencyplanning for that eventuality.Today’s payment ecosystemLet’s start with some basics regarding the current payment ecosystem.Most of what we think of as money today consists of bank deposits. And most payments—whether by debit, credit, direct transfer or cheque—involve the transfer of funds between banksor other financial institutions.Such transfers are supported by payment systems—the hardware and software that allow anyfinancial institution to transfer funds to another. In Canada, these systems move more than $200billion every business day.The Bank of Canada plays a distinct role in payments. This is because payments from onefinancial institution to another are finally settled through a transfer of funds between theiraccounts at the Bank of Canada.The Bank is also responsible for overseeing and regulating the whole system.In addition, we design, issue and distribute bank notes—the cash Canadians physicallyexchange with others to purchase goods and services.So let’s talk about cash. 1 / 8BIS central bankers' speeches
Cash is an old and simple payment technology. It has stood the test of time because it hasseveral important advantages.First and foremost, cash is safe. It is legal tender with a relatively stable value and is widelyaccepted for payment.It also establishes confidence in the banking system. A bank’s customers can be reassured that,any time they want, they can convert their deposits into cash.Furthermore, cash is universally accessible. Anyone can use it, including people who don’t havebank accounts. Perhaps not surprisingly, then, cash is very important to those who may facechallenges accessing alternative payment methods—such as the homeless and those living inremote communities.Cash is resilient—it works even when computer systems go down or during a power failure.It is private—you can buy everyday goods and services without revealing your identity or yourpersonal or financial information.Cash also preserves an element of competition in the financial system, by providing a cheap andreliable alternative to credit and debit cards.All this being said, cash also has its limitations.It is more suitable for relatively low-value payments because of the obvious security risks ofcarrying around large volumes of cash.And it cannot be used to make purchases remotely.With this background in mind, I would like to discuss some issues that Canada’s paymentecosystem is currently facing.Changes and challengesRecent advances in technology offer opportunities to improve our core payment infrastructure.We have seen this at the retail level, with contactless “tap and go” payments, mobile banking andother innovations.The structure of our economy is also changing, with transactions increasingly taking placeonline.Partly reflecting these innovations, we are seeing a steady decline in the use of cash in retailtransactions.In a 2017 Bank of Canada survey that asked Canadians how they pay for goods and services,respondents said that they use cash for about one-third of their transactions—compared withmore than half just a decade ago.And about 1 in 10 Canadians now claims to be entirely “cashless.”In some countries, such as Sweden and Norway, the use of cash has declined to a level wheremerchants are finding it too costly to accept cash, and banks are scaling back their processingservices. I’ll talk later about how we can maintain access to cash, particularly for those“unbanked” or “underbanked” members of our society.In addition to these trends driven mainly by technology, globalization has put the spotlight oncross-border payments.1 2 / 8BIS central bankers' speeches
Canadians who have family members in other countries often face high costs and long delays insending them money. Businesses face similar drawbacks in paying for goods and services theypurchase from outside Canada.These frictions and costs have motivated private digital currencies to aspire to make it easier andcheaper to move funds around.We are all familiar with the explosion of cryptocurrencies over the past few years. Bitcoin andsimilar digital assets were introduced with the hopes of becoming the money of the future.That hasn’t happened, nor is it ever likely to. Transacting in cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin isjust too expensive, and their purchasing power is too unstable.A more recent and potentially impactful innovation is so-called “stablecoins,” which are designedto maintain a stable value in terms of a currency or commodity. In most cases, they are backed—either fully or in part—by currency holdings.Compared with earlier forms of cryptocurrencies, stablecoins have better prospects forwidespread adoption—and, correspondingly, greater potential to further transform the world ofmoney and payments.The most prominent example is Libra, a stablecoin that Facebook, along with an association ofother companies, is planning to launch.Libra would run on an existing messaging platform with strong brand recognition. This would giveit the potential to reach billions of people—including many with little or no access to banks orfinancial services.It’s tough to predict if Libra will ever live up to its promises or even come into existence. But it is agood example of a transformative technology that affects how the Bank needs to respond to thefuture of money.Building a modern ecosystemSo let me now talk about some key areas where the Bank of Canada is focusing in order to adaptto this fast-moving world of payments.First, we are working to make sure that Canadians who wish to use bank notes can continue todo so.We are working with financial institutions to maintain a state-of-the-art distribution system forcash. This will help ensure that accepting cash remains cost-effective for merchants.Some other jurisdictions have adopted more prescriptive approaches, including laws requiringacceptance of cash at the point of sale. These approaches have both costs and benefits thatshould be further examined.A second area of focus is the Bank’s support for Payments Canada’s payment modernizationefforts. The goal is to provide consumers, businesses and financial institutions with a modern,fast and convenient payment system.One exciting component of this project is the construction of a fast, always-on payment systemcalled Real-Time Rail (RTR).This system is being designed with building blocks to meet consumers’ payment needs todayand in the future.2 3 / 8BIS central bankers' speeches
Based on this, you may imagine paying for groceries as you pick them off the shelf. Or orderingand paying at your favourite shawarma truck by tapping your phone to a code on the menu.The Bank is working with Payments Canada and stakeholders like Interac to ensure RTR isresilient and promotes competition and innovation in the Canadian payment ecosystem.  To complement RTR, the government is exploring open banking—also known as consumer-directed finance. The intent of open banking is to give customers greater control of their financialdata and safe access to a wider range of financial services, while reducing costs.This too would help foster a more innovative and competitive financial system.The government is also looking to implement a new Retail Payments Oversight Framework thatwill require payment service providers to beef up their risk management practices, and betterprotect end-users from losses.The Bank has been tapped as the regulatory authority to monitor compliance, includingmaintaining a public registry of regulated payment service providers.A third area of focus is an international one—cross-border payments.The Bank of Canada collaborated with the Bank of England and the Monetary Authority ofSingapore to identify the “pain points” in cross-border payments. Work on this topic iscontinuing through domestic and international forums, including the G20.It goes without saying that any improvements to moving money internationally would need tomaintain vital safeguards—such as know-your-customer regulations—that detect and deterexploitation of the system for criminal or terrorist purposes.A fourth important area of focus is private digital currencies, some of which have been touted asthe answer to the challenges of cross-border payments.While the future of Libra and other stablecoins is uncertain, private digital currencies are a globalphenomenon. A global effort is required to understand the wide-ranging implications and ensurethe regulatory framework is fit for purpose.To this end, the Bank of Canada is pleased to be working with the Financial Stability Board,alongside 23 other jurisdictions, to identify supervisory and regulatory issues posed by fintechinnovations.  We are holding fast to the principles that innovation, competition and consumer choice are good,and that disruption is not the enemy.But it is essential to understand and manage the risks to individuals, businesses and the entirefinancial system that arise from any product offered to the public.Contingency planning for a central bank digital currencyAll of this leads me to my final area of focus.In the context of the issues I’ve raised today, there has been increasing discussion around acentral bank digital currency (CBDC). We can think of this as a digital version of cash.Digital currencies are designed to provide the same benefits as cash—safety, universal access,resilience, privacy and competition—but in an electronic format that could be used for onlinetransactions or at the point of sale, using a mobile phone or a special card or device.34 4 / 8BIS central bankers' speeches
It would be truly equivalent to cash.Today we have released a comprehensive document that outlines in greater detail ourrecommendations with respect to a CBDC.I encourage you to visit our website and read some of our thinking, but I’ll share the highlightswith you.We have concluded that there is not a compelling case to issue a CBDC at this time. Canadianswill continue to be well-served by the existing payment ecosystem, provided it is modernized andremains fit for purpose. This means that:bank notes remain available to Canadians who want to use them, including marginalizedpopulations in our society;the Canadian payment system is brought up to date and problems with cross-borderpayments are addressed; andan appropriate regulatory framework for stablecoins and other private digital currencies isestablished, both in Canada and globally.All this being said, the world can change very quickly. The Bank of Canada can imaginescenarios in which we would consider issuing a CBDC so we can continue to provide Canadianswith trustworthy methods of payment.One scenario would be if we ever reach the tipping point where cash could no longer be used fora sufficiently wide range of transactions.That scenario would raise several potential concerns:payment services offered by large financial institutions could become the only game in town,giving them increased market power;people without adequate banking services would find it even more difficult to participate fullyin the economy;people would lose the ability to conduct transactions privately; andthe system could have a single point of failure, making it more vulnerable to computersystem breakdowns and power outages.Of course, even such a shift toward a cashless society does not automatically mean the Bankwould issue a CBDC. That’s a choice that Canadians and their elected representatives wouldneed to make at the time.A second scenario that may lead to considering a CBDC is widespread use of private digitalcurrencies.This could be one dominant digital currency created by a big tech company—a monopoly thatwould erode competition and privacy and pose an unacceptable challenge to Canadian monetarysovereignty.We could also imagine not one, but several, private digital currencies emerging. In this case,consumers and merchants would face an assortment of different methods of payment—reminiscent of a time before the Bank of Canada was created, when the country had multipleissuers of bank notes.In both scenarios, there would be an argument for the Bank of Canada to step in. The Bankwould do this as a trusted public institution, creating an official digital currency that is designedwith the interest of the public as its top priority, with no commercial motive. 5 / 8BIS central bankers' speeches
This last point is important, according to a poll published a few weeks ago by the OfficialMonetary and Financial Institutions Forum. More than half of the people surveyed in 13 countriessaid they would prefer a digital currency issued by their central bank. Major internet technologycompanies ranked lowest in public confidence.Beyond this, it is central to both our monetary sovereignty and the Bank’s ability to conductmonetary policy that we preserve our Canadian dollar as the unit of account—meaning thatprices are quoted in Canadian dollars. That could be challenged if a private digital currencydenominated in another currency, or basket of currencies, made serious inroads.Next stepsSo, where to next?While we don’t know what the future may bring, we need to move forward to work out what apotential CBDC might look like and how it could be managed, if the decision were ever taken toissue one.There are many aspects to consider in this contingency planning.How could a CBDC be integrated with other methods of payment yet be resilient so that it stillworks during a power failure, for example?What business model might work? Would the Bank try to develop it mainly in-house, or would itmake more sense to partner with the private sector?How would a CBDC work for cross-border transactions?And, perhaps most importantly, how could we ensure that Canadians could continue to transactprivately for legitimate purposes, while guarding against illicit activities like money laundering,terrorist financing and tax evasion?Answering these questions is part of our work. And we’re not alone—a recent survey by the Bankfor International Settlements covering 66 central banks found that about 80 percent of them arecurrently engaged in CBDC work and 10 percent are likely to issue a CBDC within three years.We have formed a working group with the central banks of England, Japan, the European Union,Sweden and Switzerland, as well as the Bank for International Settlements. We will use thisplatform to share experiences as we assess potential cases for a CBDC in our homejurisdictions.But a CBDC could only be launched successfully if Canadians want it. So we will be consultingwith governments and key stakeholders in provinces and territories across Canada, like those ofyou in the audience today.We’ll also consider which design features might make a CBDC attractive as paymenttechnologies and the financial system evolve.We will consult with payment service providers and merchants to ensure the business model isvalid and roles are clear.In addition, we are consulting with various government agencies, recognizing that many areasrelevant to a CBDC are outside the responsibility of the Bank of Canada. This will includediscussions on how to combine privacy with adequate safeguards against illicit use.Another essential element is that the Bank would need proper legislative authority to issue aCBDC should the decision be made to issue one.56 6 / 8BIS central bankers' speeches
In our work, we will continue to take a holistic view across the whole payment ecosystem toensure that all aspects—payment systems, cash and any future CBDC—would continue tofunction together to provide Canadians with the efficient, safe and secure payment services theyneed.All of this will be undertaken while ensuring we manage any risks raised by a CBDC if a decisionis ever taken to issue one—not just for the Bank of Canada but also for banks, payment serviceproviders and end-users.ConclusionIn conclusion, it is clear that technology is changing the world around us. And while we cannotperfectly predict the future, we can certainly plan for contingencies. This includes readyingourselves in case a decision is made some day to issue a Bank of Canada digital currency.Some out there may question why we would even need a CBDC when so much of our moneyappears to flow electronically now anyway.Let’s go back to the two scenarios I presented earlier that could warrant the launch of a CBDC.The first is where the use of physical cash is reduced or eliminated altogether. The second iswhere private cryptocurrencies make serious inroads.If either scenario came to pass, society may be well-served with a digital currency:that is designed, issued and distributed by an organization that is guided by the interest ofthe public good, rather than profit;that is safe, resilient, universally accessible and private—just like cash; andthat is backed by a central bank’s balance sheet and its reputation for preserving the value ofour money.Our intent would not be to issue a CBDC to replace bank notes or chartered bank deposits. Thepublic still wants both of these products, and we will support them.In fact, we are actively planning for the design of a new $5 bank note. The Bank is in the midst ofa wide consultation process to ask Canadians who they want as the portrait subject of this newbank note.And as the world changes, the Bank will continue to fulfill its mandate to support secure, reliableand efficient payment options that benefit all Canadians.Thank you for your time and attention this afternoon, and I look forward to your questions.I would like to thank Scott Hendry and Darcey McVanel for their help in preparing this speech.C. Henry, K. Huynh and A. Welte, “2017 Methods-of-Payments Survey Report,” Bank of Canada Staff DiscussionPaper No. 2018–17 (December 2018).T. Lane, “Decrypting ‘Crypto’” (remarks to the Haskayne School of Business, University of Calgary, Calgary,Alberta, October 1, 2018).For more information on in this initiative, Phase 4 of Project Jasper, visit the Bank of Canada website.Financial Stability Board, “Monitoring of FinTech.”Official Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum (OMFIF), Digital Currencies—A Question of Trust. An OMFIFReport on Global Public Confidence in Monetary, Financial and Payment Institutions, 2020.123456 7 / 8BIS central bankers' speeches
C. Boar, H. Holden and A. Wadsworth, “Impending Arrival—A Sequel to the Survey on Central Bank DigitalCurrency,” Bank for International Settlements (BIS) Papers No. 107 (January 2020).6 8 / 8BIS central bankers' speeches
11/03/2020The Virus and the Australian Economy | Speeches | RBAhttps://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2020/sp-dg-2020-03-11.html1/12SpeechThe Virus and the Australian EconomyGuy Debelle Deputy GovernorKeynote Address at the Australian Financial Review BusinessSummit Sydney – 11 March 2020Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today.I had been intending to talk about investment, the theme of this conference. But, given thecircumstances, instead I will provide a summary of how the Bank is seeing developments in theeconomy at the moment. I will provide our assessment of where the economy was ahead of theonset of the coronavirus as well as an assessment of the effect of the virus to date, including onfinancial markets.The December quarter national accounts confirmed our assessment that the Australian economyended 2019 with a gradual pick-up in growth. Growth over the year was 2¼ per cent, up from a lowof 1½ per cent. Consumption growth was a little stronger in the quarter, although still subdued. Wehad estimated that the bushfires will subtract around 0.2 percentage points from growth across theDecember and March quarters, but besides that, economic growth was set to continue to pick upsupported by low interest rates, the lower exchange rate, a rise in mining investment, high levels ofspending on infrastructure and an expected recovery in residential construction.On the global side, around the turn of the year there were indications that the global economy wascoming out of a soft patch of growth. The trade tensions between China and the US had abated,surveys of business conditions were picking up and industrial production was improving. Financialconditions were very stimulatory and supporting the pick-up in global growth.Since then, there is no doubt that the outbreak of the virus has significantly disrupted thismomentum, initially in China and now more broadly. We do not have a clear picture yet on thedisruption to the Chinese economy caused by the virus and the measures put in place to contain thevirus. But the following two graphs provide some sense of the significant disruption to the Chinesepeople and economy.[*][1]
11/03/2020The Virus and the Australian Economy | Speeches | RBAhttps://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2020/sp-dg-2020-03-11.html2/12The coal consumption graph (Graph 1) shows the regular significant decline in production aroundChinese New Year. But this year, the return to normal production has been significantly delayed.There was no ramp up in production after the holiday period, and we are now more than four weekspast the point where the Chinese economy is normally back to full-scale production. The straightarithmetic of losing a substantial amount of output over a period of several weeks implies asignificant hit to economic activity. The road congestion graph (Graph 2) tells a similar story of aprotracted period of low output.Graph 1
11/03/2020The Virus and the Australian Economy | Speeches | RBAhttps://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2020/sp-dg-2020-03-11.html3/12Graph 2Both show that the Chinese economy is now only gradually returning to normal. Even as this occurs,it is very uncertain how long it will take to repair the severe disruption to supply chains.In the meantime, the virus has spread to other countries. They too are beginning to suffer significantdisruptions, the extent and duration of which is unknown at this time.The conclusion is that the global economy will be materially weaker in the first quarter of 2020 andin the period ahead.In terms of the effect on the Australian economy, we have estimated the direct impact on theeducation and tourism sectors in the March quarter. Graph 3 shows the normal profile of visitorarrivals into Australia. Since January, inbound airline capacity from China has declined by90 per cent, which gives a guide to the size of the decline in arrivals from China. Up until recently,tourist arrivals from other countries had held up reasonably well but that may no longer be true.From our liaison with the education sector, including the universities, as well as student visanumbers, we have information on the number of foreign students who have been unable to resumetheir studies. Graph 4 shows the country of origin of foreign students in Australia.
11/03/2020The Virus and the Australian Economy | Speeches | RBAhttps://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2020/sp-dg-2020-03-11.html4/12Graph 3
11/03/2020The Virus and the Australian Economy | Speeches | RBAhttps://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2020/sp-dg-2020-03-11.html5/12Graph 4We have used this information to estimate the impact of the virus in these two sectors of theeconomy. The estimate is approximate, but at this stage we think the decline in services exports inthe March quarter will amount to at least 10 per cent, roughly evenly split between lower tourismand education exports. As service exports account for 5 per cent of GDP, this translates into asubtraction from growth of ½ per cent of GDP in the March quarter from these two sources.Through our business liaison program we are gathering information on supply chain disruptionswhich are affecting the construction and retail sectors in particular. Clearly we are still only in theearly weeks of March, so the picture can change from here.It is just too uncertain to assess the impact of the virus beyond the March quarter.Our liaison with the resources sector does not indicate any material disruption to exports of iron oreand coal at this stage. Indeed, iron ore and coal prices have been resilient. Disruptions to Chinesedomestic production of iron ore and coal have been a factor in this, which has resulted in more useof imported resources. Another is the expectation that the Chinese policy response will involve asignificant amount of infrastructure spending which will benefit bulk commodities. The movements inthese commodity prices stand in contrast to the large decline in the oil price, which will flow throughto LNG prices (Graph 5).
11/03/2020The Virus and the Australian Economy | Speeches | RBAhttps://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2020/sp-dg-2020-03-11.html6/12Graph 5I will now summarise recent developments in financial markets. There has been a large increase inrisk aversion and uncertainty. The virus is going to have a material economic impact but it is notclear how large that will be. That makes it difficult for the market to reprice financial assets.Policy interest rates have been reduced in some countries, including Australia, and further reductionsare expected where that is possible. Currently market pricing implies a reduction of between 75 and100 basis points in the Fed's policy rate at their meeting next week.Government bond yields have declined to historic lows, because of the shift downwards in actual andexpected policy rates, reduced expectations for growth and a flight to safety (Graph 6). The25 per cent fall in oil prices on Monday morning has also led to lower expectations of inflation. The10 year US treasury yield reached a low below 35 basis points on Monday, including a 25 basis pointdecline at the opening of trade in Asia. It has since risen to be around 65 basis points at the time ofwriting.Australian government bond yields have been driven by the global developments. They haven'tdeclined as much as US Treasuries, such that the spread between the 10 year yields is now slightlypositive, having been negative over the past two years. At the time of writing, the Australiangovernment can borrow for 10 years at 75 basis points.
11/03/2020The Virus and the Australian Economy | Speeches | RBAhttps://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2020/sp-dg-2020-03-11.html7/12Graph 6Equity prices have fallen by as much as 20 per cent since their all-time peak of less than a monthago, although the Australian market rebounded on Tuesday (Graph 7). The falls have beenparticularly large for companies in the oil sector, as well as tourism.
11/03/2020The Virus and the Australian Economy | Speeches | RBAhttps://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2020/sp-dg-2020-03-11.html8/12Graph 7Corporate bond spreads have widened. Through the first part of this move, the widening in largepart reflected the rapid shift downwards in the risk free (government bond) curve. Investment gradebond spreads widened but investment grade yields actually fell (Graph 8). In the last few daysthough, we have seen yields rise along with the spreads. The high yield sector has seen a markedrise in yields and spreads, particularly in the US reflecting the prevalence of energy companies inthat market. Bond issuance has been extremely low, in part because issuers do not want to appearto be in desperate need of funds in a dislocated market. It is also worth noting that just as equitiesprices have fallen from historic highs, so too have corporate bond prices fallen from historic highs.
11/03/2020The Virus and the Australian Economy | Speeches | RBAhttps://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2020/sp-dg-2020-03-11.html9/12Graph 8Liquidity in fixed income markets has been poor at times, including in US Treasuries. The liquidityenvironment has changed considerably in the past decade in response to changed regulations. Thebanking sector is much less willing and able to warehouse risk and provide liquidity than in thepast.The Australian banking system is well capitalised and is in a strong liquidity position. The Australianbanks had raised a significant amount of wholesale funding before the disruption to markets anddeposit inflows are robust. They are resilient to a period of market disruption. Spreads on Australianbank bonds have widened, although yields remain at levels that are still very low historically. Wehave not seen any particular sign of pressure in our daily market operations to date. The spreadbetween the bank bill swap rate and the expected policy rate (OIS) has risen in recent days butremains low, nothing at all like what occurred in GFC.Exchange rate volatility has been very low for a considerable period of time, but has picked up in thepast few days. However it still remains considerably lower than volatility in other financial markets.The yen has appreciated by as much as 10 per cent against the US dollar, as Japanese investorsrepatriate funds, as normally occurs in these type of situations (Graph 9). More surprisingly, the eurohas also appreciated against the US dollar. Market intelligence indicates that part of the reason forthis is the liquidation of trades that were funded in euros and invested in higher yielding assets suchas emerging market bonds. The sharp narrowing in the interest differential with the US has alsocontributed.[2]
11/03/2020The Virus and the Australian Economy | Speeches | RBAhttps://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2020/sp-dg-2020-03-11.html10/12Graph 9The Australian dollar has depreciated by 6 per cent since the beginning of the year to decade lowsagainst the US dollar and on a trade-weighted basis (Graph 10). This will provide a helpful boost tothe Australian economy and has occurred despite the prices of the bulk commodities, iron ore andcoal, remaining resilient.
11/03/2020The Virus and the Australian Economy | Speeches | RBAhttps://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2020/sp-dg-2020-03-11.html11/12Graph 10Turning to monetary policy, the Board met last week and decided to lower the cash rate by 25 basispoints to 0.5 per cent. This decision was taken to support the economy by boosting demand and tooffset the tightening in financial conditions that otherwise was occurring.The reduction in the cash rate at the March meeting was passed in full through to mortgage rates.The cash rate has been reduced by 100 basis points since June. This has translated into a reductionin mortgage rates of 95 basis points. This has occurred through the combination of a reduction in thestandard variable rate of 85 basis points, larger discounts to new borrowers and existing borrowersrefinancing to take advantage of larger discounts. While a lower and flatter interest rate structureputs pressure on bank margins, it is important to remember that the easing in monetary policy willhelp support the Australian economy which in turn supports the credit quality of the banks' portfoliosof loans.The virus is a shock to both demand and supply. Monetary policy does not have an effect on thesupply side, but can work to ensure demand is stronger than it otherwise would be. Lower interestrates will provide more disposable income to the household sector and those businesses with debt.They may not spend it straight away, but it brings forward the day when they will be comfortablewith their balance sheets and resume a normal pattern of spending. Monetary policy also worksthrough the exchange rate which will help mitigate the effect of the virus' impact on externaldemand.The effect of the virus will come to an end at some point. Once we get beyond the effect of thevirus, the Australian economy will be supported by the low level of interest rates, the lower exchange
11/03/2020The Virus and the Australian Economy | Speeches | RBAhttps://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2020/sp-dg-2020-03-11.html12/12© Reserve Bank of Australia, 2001–2020. All rights reserved.The Reserve Bank of Australia acknowledges the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples of Australia as the Traditional Custodians of thisland, and recognises their continuing connection to Country. We pay our respects to their Elders, past, present and emerging.rate, a pick-up in mining investment, sustained spending on infrastructure and an expected recoveryin residential construction.The Government has announced its intention to support jobs, incomes, small business andinvestment which will provide welcome support to the economy. The combined effect of fiscal andmonetary policy will help us navigate a difficult period for the Australian economy. They will also helpensure the Australian economy is well placed to bounce back quickly once the virus is contained.EndnotesThanks to Lachlan Dynan, David Lancaster and Mark Chambers for their comments and input.[*]I will revisit the topic of investment at a later date.[1]See https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2018/sp-dg-2018-12-06.html andhttps://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2015/sp-ag-2015-09-16.html[2]
Kevin Stiroh: Climate change and risk management in banksupervisionRemarks by Mr Kevin Stiroh, Executive Vice President of the Financial Institution SupervisionGroup of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at the conference on “Risks, Opportunities, andInvestment in the Era of Climate Change”, Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts, 4March 2020.*   *   *As prepared for deliveryIntroductionGood afternoon and thank you for the opportunity to participate in this conference on “Risks,Opportunities, and Investments in the Era of Climate Change,” a topic of critical importance forall of us.Climate change is already affecting economic and financial outcomes, and projections point toincreasingly severe and unpredictable change. In recent years, we’ve seen a growing focus ofcentral banks on the financial risks related to climate change. Some may argue that this shiftwas slow in coming, but the change is striking nevertheless. Beginning with Bank of EnglandGovernor Mark Carney’s speech in 2015 , climate change has emerged as a key issue globally.Within the Federal Reserve, Governor Brainard detailed how climate change impacts the Fed’score objectives around monetary policy, financial stability, financial regulation and supervision,community and consumer affairs, and payments and describes efforts to build capacity toassess these risks.Today, I’m going to take a more narrow perspective and talk about climate change from theperspective of risk management. I’ll discuss how the development of new risks associated withclimate change is beginning to change the practice of risk management at financial institutions interms of governance, risk identification and management, scenario analysis and transparency. I’llalso say a few words on why I believe it is appropriate, even critical, for supervisors to focus onthis particular risk.Before proceeding, I will emphasize that I am speaking for myself and my views do notnecessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal ReserveSystem.Climate Change and Risk ManagementThe discussion of climate change and risk management has introduced a new lexicon for riskdiscussions. Physical risk is the potential for losses as climate-related changes disrupt businessoperations, destroy capital and interrupt economic activity. Transition risk is the potential for lossresulting from a shift toward a lower-carbon economy as policy, consumer sentiment andtechnological innovations impact the value of certain assets and liabilities. These effects will befelt across business sectors and asset classes, on strategies and operations, and through thebalance sheets and income statements of financial firms.At a practical level, risk managers at financial institutions need to develop the appropriate tools toidentify, monitor and manage these risks. From one perspective, climate-related risks maymanifest as realizations of familiar risks such as credit, market, operational, legal andreputational risk. The tools risk managers use, however, will need to change to reflect new data,changing relationships, and evolving interconnections. Traditional backward-looking modelsbased on historical trends may no longer be reliable, so the development of forward-looking1234 1 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
approaches grounded in scenario-based analyses may be necessary. Perhaps even moreimportantly, physical and transition risks will likely introduce new strategic risks associated withthe challenges and opportunities of sectoral reallocations of economic activity, new productionpatterns and evolving industry exposures.Range of PracticesGiven these emerging risks, what are large financial institutions actually doing to identify, monitor,and manage them? This is a new and rapidly evolving field, so we are far from coalescing aroundbest practices or industry standards. Nevertheless, some emerging themes are emerging fromthe largest, most complex financial institutions. I will touch on governance, risk identification andmanagement, scenario analysis, and transparency.I’ll begin with governance. Boards of directors and senior management are increasingly attunedto the risks posed by climate change as pressure from various stakeholders intensifies. Forexample, some firms are establishing internal climate-related working groups to developenterprise-wide climate frameworks and to ensure climate considerations such as geographicconcentrations or regulatory changes are better integrated into strategic decision-making. Somesenior leaders are discussing risk materiality in geographic and sectoral reviews and results offorward-looking climate scenario analyses. Few firms, however, have formally modified orqualified enterprise-wide risk appetite statements to acknowledge climate to date, although someare considering this. Based on our observations, information flows and detailed climate reportingappear more prevalent at the management committee level rather than boards of directors.In terms of risk identification and management, some firms are beginning to assess how gradualchanges in climate impact operational resilience and the potential for business disruption.Several conduct periodic disruption simulations with predictive weather modeling as part of theirresiliency programs. This work builds on experience managing risks posed by disaster events,including severe weather, to their operations and infrastructure such as branches, equipmentand data centers. This includes updating disaster response playbooks and business continuityplans to address the resultant operational risks.In terms of credit and market risk, some firms are building ex-ante climate risk assessments intosectoral or industry reviews, while others are considering the role of climate change withintraditional ex-post assessments of exposures and loss estimates related to severe weatherevents like wildfires, hurricanes, and flooding. Examples include: heightened monitoring ofmortgage concentrations in high-risk areas, modified risk limits or reduced tenors fortransactions to certain carbon-intensive sectors, and consideration of climate risk disclosures inoffering documents.Climate-related scenario analysis is an emerging practice at multiple firms to identify lendingportfolio sensitivity to both physical and transition risks. For physical risk scenarios, this mightinclude stressing mortgage lending in discrete geographies against both publically availablenatural hazard scenarios and internally generated severe weather simulations. For transition riskscenarios, some firms are using their energy lending portfolios as a starting point to modeltransition mechanisms. Additionally, some firms are considering how to expand analysis to moreindirectly impacted sectors, such as transportation and industrials, or to move beyond lendingexposures to trading positions.Finally, firms are evaluating how to best execute on public commitments to transparency in theclimate space. Nearly all global systemically important banks, including all eight U.S. G-SIBS,have signed onto the Task-Force for Climate-Related Financial Disclosures (TCFD), and manyof these have started disclosing under this framework to various extents. Firms continue to bechallenged in the identification and measurement of climate risk embedded in their portfolios,however, so these disclosures may take some time to develop as the industry considers how to45 2 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
establish common standards.Role of SupervisionI’ll turn now to the perspective of a bank supervisor. In the context of climate change, in my view,bank supervision should focus on ensuring that appropriate risk management frameworks are inplace, rather than using supervisory tools for broader objectives. That is, supervisors can focuson identifying and managing risks, both microprudential and macroprudential, that emerge alonga transition path to a more sustainable economy. Bank supervisors, however, are not in theposition to advocate for, or provide incentives for, a particular policy outcome. Those broaderpolicy goals are the purview of elected officials and governments, and policymakers. Supervisorscan and should use our oversight tools to ensure financial institutions are prepared for andresilient to all types of relevant risks, including climate-related events.From that perspective, climate change introduces challenges for supervisors related to timehorizon, data limitations, and inherent complexity. One question that gets particular attentioncenters on time horizon and prioritization. More specifically, given the many risks that financialfirms face—cybersecurity, geopolitical uncertainty, and the credit cycle to name a few—and therelatively long time horizon around climate change, why should supervisors focus on thisparticular risk? I think that is a fair question and there are good answers.First, we are already observing the impacts of climate change on financial firms. Evidencecontinues to grow that climate change is affecting economic and financial outcomes. Moreover,evidence from climate science suggests that some further physical climate impacts are locked-in due to past emissions. Some investors consider an assessment of sustainability to beintegral to their fiduciary responsibilities. And, as I described earlier, supervised firms arechoosing to build capacity in this areas, so supervisors need to understand and assess thesechanges. This is a risk management question for today with direct implications for safety andsoundness.Second, given the complexity of the problem, we all need time to build data, models, andintellectual capacity to address risks as they arise in the future. It took the better part of a decadeto approach a steady-state in central bank stress testing capabilities for more familiar andarguably less complex risks like credit card losses or shocks to asset values from interest ratespikes. The economics of climate change are more complex with feedback effects, non-linearities and massive uncertainty that will require substantial investments to understand.Third, financial markets and institutions face the potential for a “Minsky moment” related toclimate change—an abrupt repricing of assets in response to a catastrophic event or change ininvestor perceptions. Financial firms and supervisors need to consider the potential and impactof this type of sudden event.ConclusionIn closing, the impact of climate change on the structure and performance of the economy andthe financial sector is happening now and will continue. Conferences like this certainly help tofurther our awareness and understanding of this critical issue. I am confident that risk managersand central banks will continue to invest and build capacity to understand and mitigate theserisks in order to make the financial sector more resilient.I look forward to hearing the insights from across the financial sector in the remainder of thisconference.Thank you for your attention.67891011121 3 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
U.S. Global Change Research Program, “Fourth National Climate Assessment: Volume II: Impacts, Risks andAdaptation in the United States,” Washington USGCRP, 2018.Governor Mark Carney, Bank of England, “Breaking the Tragedy of the Horizon – Climate Change and FinancialStability”, Sept. 2015.Governor Lael Brainard, Federal Reserve Board of Governors, “Why Climate Change Matters for Monetary Policyand Financial Stability”, Nov. 2019.Patrick Bolton, Morgan Despress, Luiz Awazu Pereira da Silva, Frederic Samama, and Romain Svartzman, “TheGreen Swan – Central Banking and Financial Stability in the Age of Climate Change,” Bank for InternationalSettlements, 2020.TCFD site and review of annual reports, integrated reports, non-financial reports, sustainability reports andstandalone climate-related disclosure reports of individual GSIBs.In the international context, see Enhancing Banks’ and Insurers’ Approaches to Managing the Financial Risksfrom Climate Change, Bank of England Supervisory Statement 3/19, April 15, 2019; ECB Banking Supervision:Risk Assessment for 2020, European Central Bank; and Bolton et al. (2020).Kevin J. Stiroh, New York Fed, Emerging Issues for Risk Managers, Nov, 2019.Governor Lael Brainard, Federal Reserve Board of Governors, Why Climate Change Matters for Monetary Policyand Financial Stability, Nov. 2019.“Demystifying Climate Scenario Analysis for Financial Stakeholders,” Four Twenty Seven, 2019. “Climate riskand response,” McKinsey Global Institute, 2020. “Fifth Assessment Report (AR5), the Synthesis Report (SYR),”Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (2015).Fink, Larry, A Fundamental Reshaping of Finance, Letter to CEOs, 2020.See The 2021 Biennial Exploratory Scenario on the Financial Risks from Climate Change, Bank of EnglandDiscussion Paper, December 2019 for a discussion of relevant issues.Carney (2015).123456789101112 4 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
John C Williams: The economic outlookRemarks by Mr John C Williams, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal ReserveBank of New York, at the Foreign Policy Association, New York City, 5 March 2020.*   *   *As prepared for deliveryThank you so much for this award. It’s a genuine honor to be recognized in this way. And allowme to add my congratulations to all the other organizations and individuals that have beencommended this evening. The work that you’re doing—particularly in the area of corporate socialresponsibility—is so important.On Tuesday, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) lowered the target range for thefederal funds rate by 1/2 percentage point. This action was in response to the evolving risks thecoronavirus poses to the U.S. economy. Tonight, I’ll use my remarks to provide more contextaround that decision and about our response as we look ahead.But before I give this evening’s remarks I need to give the standard Fed disclaimer that the viewsI express today are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Open MarketCommittee or others in the Federal Reserve System.Economic OutlookTo start, let me emphasize that the fundamentals of the U.S. economy remain strong. We’veseen continued solid job growth, unemployment is at a historically low level, and we entered 2020with very good momentum. After a year that was characterized by uncertainties, global growthappeared to be stabilizing, and geopolitical risks receding. And monetary policy was wellpositioned to support the economic expansion and the achievement of the Fed’s goals ofmaximum employment and price stability.Risks to the EconomyHowever, during the past month the outbreak and subsequent spread of the coronavirus hasbrought with it new risks to the economic outlook. This is first and foremost a human tragedy,and my deepest sympathies are with those who have lost loved ones.The virus and the necessary scale of the response to address the public health challenge willhave near-term effects on the global economy. These repercussions have been especiallystrong in the hardest-hit countries, including China, South Korea, Japan, Italy, and Iran. We arenow also hearing reports that some businesses here in the United States are being affected bysupply disruptions and weakening demand. As people take precautions, we’re seeing concernsaround the tourism and travel sectors, in particular.Disease outbreaks require a multifaceted approach, and the coronavirus is no different. This isprimarily a public health issue, which will be fought on the front lines by doctors, nurses, andother healthcare professionals. Governments will also need to step in to support the healthcareresponse, and, if needed, to provide targeted relief to affected industries and workers throughfiscal measures.Monetary PolicyCentral banks like the Federal Reserve also have an important role to play in addressing theeconomic effects of the coronavirus, ensuring that financial markets function effectively andproviding support to the economy. These actions cannot address the health issues, but can help1 1 / 2BIS central bankers' speeches
manage near-term risks to the economy in a highly uncertain time.Earlier this week, the FOMC voted unanimously to lower the target range for the federal fundsrate to 1 to 1-1/4 percent. This strong policy action provides meaningful support to the economyand will help sustain the economic expansion. The outlook is evolving and highly uncertain. In theweeks and months ahead, we will continue to closely monitor developments and theirimplications for the economic outlook. We will use our tools and act as appropriate to support theeconomy.As part of our response, my colleagues and I in the Federal Reserve System are coordinatingwith our counterparts around the world. Tuesday’s phone call between G7 finance ministers andcentral bank governors, the subsequent statement, and policy actions by central banks are clearindications of the close alignment at the international level.Financial MarketsTurning to the specific responsibilities of the New York Fed, we are tasked with theimplementation of monetary policy. Our goals are to keep the federal funds rate within the targetrange and foster stable conditions in short-term funding markets.We will ensure that the supply of reserves in the banking system remains ample, consistent withthe FOMC’s direction. Treasury bill purchases continue to add to the underlying level ofreserves, and repo operations are keeping reserve levels ample. We are monitoring conditions inmoney markets closely. We remain flexible and ready to make adjustments to our operations asneeded to ensure that monetary policy is effectively implemented and transmitted to financialmarkets and the broader economy.ConclusionI’ll conclude with this: The coronavirus poses evolving risks to the U.S. economy. Our policyaction this week positions us well to support the economic expansion. We are carefullymonitoring the effects of the coronavirus on the U.S. economic outlook and will respond asappropriate. Our focus remains trained on serving the American people by pursuing our dualgoals of maximum employment and price stability.Once again, thank you for this evening’s award.1 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement, March 3, 2020.2 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation,October 11, 2019; Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Statement Regarding Treasury Bill Purchases andRepurchase Operations, October 11, 2019.212 2 / 2BIS central bankers' speeches
Shaktikanta Das: Micro, small and medium enterprises - challengesand way forwardSpeech by Mr Shaktikanta Das, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 15th ASSOCHAM(Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India) Annual Banking Summit, Mumbai, 6March 2020.*   *   *At the outset, I wish to thank ASSOCHAM for inviting me to their 15th Annual Banking Summit.More so because this is ASSOCHAM’s centenary year. It is a remarkable accomplishment andI extend warm greetings to all those associated with ASSOCHAM. Over the years, ASSOCHAMhas transformed itself into a forceful, proactive, forward-looking organisation to meet theaspirations of Indian business. I am certain that ASSOCHAM’s journey towards excellence willcontinue.2. In a country like India with a population size of about 1.3 billion, the Micro, Small and MediumEnterprises (MSME) sector has a vital role in the economy. It fosters entrepreneurship andgenerates large employment opportunities. As MSMEs absorb the surplus agricultural labour,they help reduce the problem of disguised unemployment in rural areas. MSMEs are alsocomplementary to large industries as ancillary units and also play an important role in the wholeeco-system of the secondary and tertiary sector.3. We all are aware that the MSME sector is passing through a challenging phase. The themeof today’s Summit - ‘Structural Reforms in MSME Funding’ - chosen by ASSOCHAM, therefore,could not be more apt and timely. In my address today, I would begin by underlining theimportance of the MSMEs to the economy. I would then delve into some challenges faced bythem and discuss some of the measures undertaken by the Reserve Bank. I shall also list outsome issues as a way forward.I. Importance to the Economy4. Let me begin by highlighting a few stylised facts on the contribution of MSME sector in India.The MSME sector contributes in a significant way to the growth of the Indian economy with avast network of about 6.3 crore units and a share of around 30 per cent in nominal GDP in2016-17. The share of the sector in total manufacturing output was even higher at 45 percent. Taking cognisance of the wider set of benefits that the sector offers to the rest of theeconomy, the Government has envisioned to increase its contribution to GDP to over 50 percent in next few years as the country aspires for a ₹ 5 trillion economy.5. As per the 73rd round of National Sample Survey (NSS) conducted during the period 2015-16, the estimated employment in MSME sector was around 11 crore. Within MSME sector,each of the three sub-sectors, namely, trade, manufacturing and other services accounted forabout a third of total employment. Around 50 per cent of the total MSMEs operate in rural areasand provide 45 per cent of total employment. Interestingly, the micro enterprises account for 97per cent of total employment in MSME sector. This relates to the problem of what is called themissing middle, which suggests that micro firms have failed to grow into smaller and mediumfirms and so on over time. This seems to have kept the micro sector bereft of enjoyingeconomies of scale, investment into fixed assets, adoption of technology and innovation.6. The share of MSME sector in India’s merchandise exports stood at around 48 per cent in2018-19. This signifies that Indian MSMEs are becoming globally competitive and theirproducts/services are being accepted overseas. In this background, special attention needs tobe given to improve the competitiveness and technology up-gradation endeavours. Various123456 1 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
schemes and programmes of the Government, therefore, should be continued and effectivelyimplemented.II. Challenges in the MSME sector7. Despite the MSME sector contributing significantly to the economy, it continues to faceseveral challenges. The major challenges include physical infrastructure bottlenecks; absenceof formalisation; inertia to technology adoption; capacity building; backward and forwardlinkages; lack of access to credit and risk capital; and the perennial problem of delayedpayments, among others. Let me now elaborate on some of these issues.Infrastructure bottlenecks and Competition8. Notwithstanding various efforts to upgrade the infrastructure, the MSME clusters, particularlythe micro enterprises, are inadequately equipped with necessary support systems which notonly impede their day-to-day business operations but also their future growth prospects. Whileinfrastructure constraint is only one side of the story, I believe that MSMEs also need to do theirbit to improve competitiveness. They need to shed their inhibition to adopt new technologies;accept e-payments; and foster in-house innovation which will help them manage theirbusinesses digitally and compete globally. Given the current scenario of global trade, the age-old methods of operating business with low levels of technology adoption deprives them ofpotential economies of scale. Lack of expertise in product development, designing, packagingand marketing strategy due to their small size add up to the pressure of adapting to thechanging environment around them. The strategy for MSMEs should be to gradually expand insize and reduce the dependence on the incentive structure provided by the Government. Theiraim should be eventually to compete on a global scale.Access to Credit and Formalisation9. Credit plays a vital role in development of MSME sector as funds at a reasonable cost canincrease their competitiveness. Credit disbursal to this sector has, however, remained sluggishin recent periods. At an aggregate level, the total credit outstanding from banks and NBFCs tothe MSME sector was approximately ₹ 16.6 lakh crore as at end of September, 2019.Scheduled commercial banks account for 90 per cent of the share of total credit outstanding.10. As many MSMEs mainly operate in the informal space, assessing their creditworthinesscan be difficult due to information asymmetry, particularly with respect to the financialperformance of their businesses. In the absence of collateral, under-writing the customer oftenentails higher operating cost. Furthermore, due to their small-scale operations, MSMEs are notable to raise risk capital. They are also unable to take advantage of most of the Governmentschemes which are mostly based on digital infrastructure and require beneficiaries to havesome form of digital identify and presence. With the implementation of structural reforms likeGST and JAM trinity, the informal units are, however, getting integrated with the mainstream inrecent years.Delayed Payments11. A large number of MSMEs are ancillary units catering to the needs of large industries, bothin the public and private sector. They often face the problem of delayed payments, affectingtheir cash flow and working capital availability. Most of the time, delay in realisation of suchreceivables increases their operating cycle and reduces their ability to procure new orders orfulfil the existing ones. A primary survey conducted by Reserve Bank in December 2019showed that 44 per cent of MSMEs engaged in manufacturing activities faced delay inpayments. The ones not receiving timely payment mainly belonged to basic metal and metalproducts, engineering, construction and infrastructure related industries. On the other hand,delay in payments was lower at 27 per cent for services sector. Here transport operators 2 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
mostly faced such situations. Although Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development(MSMED) Act, 2006 contains provisions related to penalty in case of delayed payments by thebuyers, weak bargaining power and the fear of losing the business prevents MSMEs to invokethis provision.III. Expert Committee on MSMEs12. In order to understand the structural bottlenecks and factors affecting the performance ofthe MSMEs, RBI had set up an Expert Committee on MSMEs under the Chairmanship of ShriU.K Sinha in January 2019. The Committee has undertaken comprehensive review of thesector and given several recommendations for the economic and financial sustainability of theMSME sector. These recommendations are wide-ranging and broadly relate to legislativechanges; infrastructure development; capacity building; technological upgradation; improvingbackward and forward linkages; improving financial support from formal sources; newertechnological interventions for robust underwriting practices; and credit delivery, among others.While some of the recommendations of the Committee have already been implemented, othersare under consideration by the authorities concerned.IV. Measures Undertaken by RBIMeasures to Improve the Credit Flow13. The Reserve Bank has taken several measures in the recent period to improve the flow ofcredit to the MSME sector. Banks form the predominant source of formal credit to MSMEs withall such loans by banks qualifying for Priority Sector Lending classification. In August 2019, wehave further incentivised banks to lend to MSMEs through the NBFC sector. Consequently,bank credit to registered NBFCs (other than Micro Finance Institutions) for on-lending to microand small enterprises up to ₹ 20 lakh per borrower are eligible for classification as prioritysector lending.14. A scheme of one-time restructuring without an asset classification downgrade waspermitted to GST registered MSME accounts that were in default but standard as on January 1,2019. As the process of formalisation of the MSME sector has a positive impact on financialstability and this process is still underway, the scheme has been extended to accounts that arestandard but in default as on January 1, 2020 and restructuring, wherever eligible, has to beimplemented latest by December 31, 2020. This will enhance the scope of the scheme bybenefitting the eligible MSME entities which could not be restructured under the provisions ofthe circular dated January 1, 2019 as also the MSME entities which have become stressedthereafter. So far, banks have restructured 6 lakh accounts out of 15 lakh eligible accountsunder the scheme. Our primary survey suggested lack of awareness about the scheme amongthe MSMEs.15. We have announced last month that incremental loans to MSMEs along with retail loans forautomobiles and residential housing will be exempted from CRR from fortnight ending January31, 2020 up to fortnight ending July 31, 2020.16. Subsequent to the introduction of an external benchmark system in October 2019, themonetary policy transmission has improved where new floating rate loans to the micro andsmall entrepreneurs were linked to the external benchmark. With a view to further strengtheningmonetary policy transmission, all new floating rate loans to medium enterprises extended bybanks from April 01, 2020 will also be linked to the external benchmarks.Addressing Delayed Payments17. As I have mentioned earlier, delay in getting payments is one the perennial problems facedby MSMEs. To address this issue, the Reserve Bank introduced the Trade Receivables 3 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
Discounting System (TReDS) in 2014. TReDS is an electronic platform where receivables ofMSMEs drawn against buyers (large corporates, PSUs, Government departments) arefinanced through multiple financiers at competitive rates. This is done through an auction-basedmechanism. To widen the scope of TReDS and to incentivise more players to be part of thisplatform, banks’ exposure through this platform were brought under priority sector lending in2016. Presently, three entities [viz., Receivables Exchange of India Ltd. (RXIL), A. TReDS, andMynd Solutions] licensed by the Reserve Bank are operating the platform for more than twoyears. Further, the Reserve Bank recently allowed ‘on tap’ authorization to entities desirous toprovide platforms for TReDS. Hence, in coming years, competition in receivables discountingspace is bound to increase with the entry of new players. This requires the corporates, both inthe public and private sector, to join the TReDS platform and make the system more efficient.18. In 2018, the Government made it mandatory for all companies with a turnover greater than ₹500 crores to register with TReDS. As on February 2020, while 8211 MSME sellers wereregistered while only 1530 buyers were participating on the platforms. I would appeal to theASSOCHAM to encourage and handhold all its members to participate in the TReDS platform.19. In the Union Budget 2020-21, the Government has announced app-based invoice financingproducts to obviate the problem of delayed payments of MSME. The mechanism may provecomplementary to the TReDS platform and would further alleviate the problem of delayedpayments.V. Way forward20. As the MSME sector holds immense potential, the need is to have a right set of policies andenabling framework which guide and support MSMEs to effectively handle their existingproblems and venture into new areas. While both the Government and the RBI have introduceda plethora of measures for improving access to finance and to promote growth of the sector,the small size of individual units and informal nature of the sector continue to pose challenges.21. The traditional bank lending system by banks is based on financial statements andcollateral of the borrower. With increased availability of data from several sources, includingGSTN, income tax, credit bureaus, etc., it is now possible to appraise the MSME loan proposalsexpeditiously by doing due diligence online. Further, with the help of Account Aggregators (AA),lenders will have access to potential borrower’s financial information at a single point, ofcourse, with his/her consent. Furthermore, emergence of FinTech companies has made itpossible to assess credit worthiness of MSMEs by utilising unexplored data sources such asdigital transaction trails, data generated through e-commerce sites, etc. Some lenders arecollaborating with FinTech companies to take advantage of such surrogate data for speediercredit underwriting for extending loans to MSME sector. These new architectures would expandthe reach of credit.22. While the new models are beneficial for those units which are digitally active, a largesegment of MSME units access credit through traditional lending models. While microenterprises act as a starting stage of entrepreneurship that requires low investment intechnology, units graduating to small and medium enterprises have to enhance their technicalcapacity and explore newer markets in order to stay competitive for sustainable growth. Recentpolicy efforts will provide an enabling environment and facilitate the MSME sector seize the newemerging opportunities. I must add that as a regulator, we in RBI have to safeguard financialstability while ensuring wider access to finance. Banks and other players on their part have toensure prudent lending.23. Besides, we in RBI have started launching cohorts under the Regulatory Sandbox. Firstsuch cohort was launched in November 2019 with the theme of ‘Retail Payments’ to spurinnovation in digital payments space to design and test newer payment services for theunserved and underserved segments. In due course, we propose to run a regulatory sandbox 4 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
for cohorts focussed on lending. This would promote innovation in MSME lending segment. Theproject on Public Credit Registry (PCR) will fundamentally address the information asymmetrythat impedes access to credit for micro and small entrepreneurs. The PCR has beenenvisaged as a database of core credit information. The registry would play crucial role inreducing credit gap in the segment.24. Given the fact that the MSME sector contributes significantly to exports, it is essential thatthey should be integrated with global value chains (GVC) to remain competitive as it offersunique opportunity to become technologically and digitally empowered. Being part of GVCwould enable MSMEs to produce quality goods and services which will have greateracceptability in the global market. The major challenges for the sector to connect to the GVCare lack of information, knowledge of markets and quality standards. In this regard, I see agreater role for cooperation among all stakeholders.25. Let me conclude by reiterating that industry bodies like the ASSOCHAM will need to extendtheir role and assist MSMEs embrace best business practices in line with the fast-changingbusiness environment.I wish this summit of ASSOCHAM all success in its centenary year.Thank You.Annual Report, Ministry of MSME 2018–19.Report of the Expert Committee on Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (Chairman: U.K. Sinha), June 25,2019.Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, Government of India, September 24, 2019.Annual Report Ministry of MSME 2018–19Krueger, A. O. (2013). The missing middle. Economic reform in India: Challenges, prospects, and lessons, 299.Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, Government of India, July 2019123456 5 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
Benjamin E Diokno: Staying on track in 2020 - sustaining positivePH growth inflation dynamicsSpeech by Mr Benjamin E Diokno, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the centralbank of the Philippines), at The Manila Times 11th Business Forum, Makati City, 3 March 2020.*   *   *The Manila Times President and CEO, Mr. Dante Ang II, my co-speakers and colleagues in thegovernment service; distinguished speakers from the business community as well as The WorldBank; ladies and gentlemen, good morning.It is a pleasure to be joining today’s Business Forum to share the BSP’s views on themacroeconomic developments and prospects for the Philippine economy at a time when thedomestic economy is seeing both low inflation and robust economic growth.In line with the conference theme and given that the other economic team members are here –allow me to share my insights on the economy’s outlook for the year from the perspective of acentral banker.High and volatile inflation is undesirable because it leads to slower real economic growth andlower social welfare for most Filipinos, especially the poor.Until recently, the Philippines is characterized as high inflation and low growth. In 2002, onwardthis trend was reversed. This development happened when BSP adopted the inflation targetingframework.In recent years, we are seeing the generally sustained positive alignment of strong growth andlow inflation which is what is needed to ensure that the economy can continue growing withouthaving to worry about overheating. The BSP, being the country’s central monetary policyauthority with the core mandate of promoting price stability, is committed to ensure that this non-inflation growth is sustained.Manageable inflation along with expectations of within-target inflation over the policy horizon isexpected to boost consumption demand, which has been consistently one of the key growthdrivers of the domestic economy.In 2019, headline inflation eased significantly, averaging 2.5 percent, lower than the 5.2 percentinflation in 2018. The deceleration was largely driven by slower price increases of rice and otherselected food and energy items. Food inflation dropped to 1.8 percent year-on-year in 2019 from6.6 percent in 2018 due to improving supply conditions. Rice prices declined in 2019 largely dueto the Rice Tariffication Law and the continued arrival of rice imports. At the same time, inflationrates for meat, fish, oils, and fats, vegetables, as well as sweeteners posted slower priceincreases during the year. Likewise, non-food inflation also fell in 2019 due largely to easingenergy prices.The pursuit of prudent and well-calibrated monetary policy by the BSP continues tosupport favorable inflation dynamics in the country.In 2019, as a pre-emptive move against the risks associated with lingering sluggish globalgrowth, the Monetary Board (MB) decided to reduce the policy rate by 25 bps in May, August, andSeptember 2019, respectively.And in its most recent monetary policy stance meeting on 6 February 2020, the MB cut the policyrate by another 25bps. The Board was of the view that a tame inflation environment, there is aroom for a further preemptive reduction in the policy rate to support market confidence. The MB 1 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
noted the possible adverse impact of the spread of the 2019 novel coronavirus on global marketsentiment as well as on domestic economic activity in the coming months.Latest baseline forecasts indicate a target-consistent path of inflation for 2020 and 2021, withaverage inflation remaining within the target range of 3.0 percent ± 1.0 percentage point.The balance of risks to the inflation outlook continue to tilt slightly toward the downside in 2020and in 2021.Forecasts by other institutions generally convey similar expectations.Capital Economics forecasts 2.8 percent inflation for 2020; Oxford Economics, 2.9 percent;Asian Development Bank, 3.0 percent; and IMF, 2.6 percent.We have also seen continued improvement in the growth of both domestic liquidity andcredit activities in line with the needs of the economy.Latest data show that domestic liquidity (M3) expanded by 11.4 percent year-on-year to about₱13.0 trillion in December 2019, faster than the 9.8-percent growth in November. Demand forcredit remained the principal driver of money supply growth.On the other hand, preliminary data show that outstanding loans of universal and commercialbanks, net of reverse repurchase (RRP) placements with the BSP, grew by 10.9 percent inDecember, faster than the 10.1-percent expansion in the previous month.Loans for production activities—which comprised 87.4 percent of banks’ aggregate loan portfolio,net of RRPs—expanded at a rate of 9.1 percent in December, higher than the reported growth inNovember at 8.1 percent. These loans continued to be driven by lending to key sectors such asreal estate activities; financial and insurance activities; electricity, gas, steam and air conditioningsupply; construction; and information and communication.Loans for household consumption increased due to faster growth in credit card and salary-basedconsumption loans during the month.The series of reduction in both policy rates and reserve requirement ratios of banks since lastyear are anticipated to support both credit conditions and overall economic activity movingforward.Meanwhile, Philippine banks remain robust, well-capitalized, and sound.The banks’ capital adequacy ratios, both on a solo and consolidated bases, continue to be wellabove the standards set by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) of 8 percent, as well asthe BSP”s standard of 10 percent.The quality of lending continues to improve. The gross non-performing loans (GNPL) and non-performing assets (NPA) ratios of Philippine universal and commercial banks (UKBs) have beenfalling since the early 2000s.The sustained health and soundness of the country’s financial sector have been supported bythe continuing financial reform agenda of the BSP in the areas of banking supervision, financialinclusion, cybersecurity and technology risk management, anti-money laundering, counter-terrorist financing, and capital market development.The country’s external payments position also continues to provide buffers particularly amid therecently recorded surpluses in the balance of payments position along with a lower currentaccount deficit for the first three quarters of 2019. We expect this trend to continue on the back ofthe continued bright prospects of the domestic economy, implementation of major infrastructure 2 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
projects, and improved global perception of the Philippines as an investment destination.While the current account is expected to post a deficit over the medium term, it remainsmanageable and financeable.  The domestic economy continues to have a steady and stablestructural sources of foreign exchange inflows that are more than enough to finance thecountry’s foreign exchange requirements without resorting to excessive foreign borrowing.The stable structural foreign exchange inflows from overseas Filipino (OF) remittances,tourism and IT-BPO receipts continue to buoy the external sector.Foreign direct investments or (FDI) for the first eleven months of 2019 reached US$6.4 billion,inching closer to the full-year projection of US$6.8 billion. We expect FDI to continue to slowdowndue to mounting uncertainties in the global environment which continue to dampen investorsentiment, both externally and domestically.FX inflows from OF remittances as well as BPO earnings continue to contribute significantly tothe country’s GIR. Cash remittances reached US$30.1 billion in 2019 while BPO revenues wererecorded at US$16.4 billion for the first three quarters of 2019.Preliminary data as of end-January 2020 shows that the country’s gross international reserves(GIR) stood at US$86.4 billion, which provides an ample external liquidity buffer that is equivalentto 7.6 months’ worth of imports of goods and services and payment of primary income. This isway above the traditional 3 month-import cover.We will continue to monitor recent developments that could pose as risks to these inflows(tourism, remittances, exports), such as the lingering weak external demand, the impact ofCorona virus outbreak in China and the continued uncertainty surrounding the trade deal betweenthe US and China, among others.The sustained build-up of the country’s foreign exchange reserves continues to lend strongsupport for the stability of the Philippine peso.The current movement of the peso reflects a confluence of factors from both theexternal and domestic environment. We continue to adopt a market-determined exchangerate which allows the value of the Philippine peso to move along with the demand for and supplyof foreign exchange in the economy.Nevertheless, the we are ready to act to prevent excessive peso volatility and overshooting dueto speculative activities.Fitch Ratings recent revision of the Philippine’s outlook from stable to positive, R&I’s upgrade ofthe Philippines’ credit rating from “BBB” to “BBB+”, the BSP’s decision to cut policy rates by 25bps as well as reports of an all-time high remittances and tourism in the Philippines in 2019provided a calm ground for country’s financial markets..The equities market continues to perform strongly in the second month of 2020 as the PSEicontinued to trade above the 7,100 benchmark, hitting a peak of 7,507.20 index pts. on 11February before closing at 7,413.0 pts on 20 February 2020.Meanwhile, the bond market, as of 19 February 2020, the Emerging Market Bond Index Global(EMBIG) Philippines spread, stood narrower at 68 bps from the end-January level of 83 bps.Similarly, the country’s 5-year sovereign credit default swap (CDS) spread decreased to 34 bpsfrom the end-January level of 42 bps. Against other neighboring economies, the Philippine CDStraded the same with Malaysia’s 34-bps spread, and narrower than Indonesia’s 58-bps spread,but wider than Thailand’s and Korea’s 26-bps and 22-bps, respectively. Overall, these numbersdemonstrate investors’ confidence in the country’s creditworthiness. 3 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
Portfolio flows to emerging markets (EMs) continued their recovery, supported by monetaryeasing by major central banks and a US-China phase one trade deal.1 However, BSP-registeredforeign portfolio investments continued to yield net outflows due to : continuing geopoliticaltensions between the US and Iran; (ii) ongoing trade negotiations between the US and China; (iii)renegotiation of the contracts of the country’s water concessionaires; and (iv) investor concernson the spread of the novel coronavirus originating from Wuhan, China. The favorable external debt profile of the country serves as cushions against externalshocks.The country’s external debt metrics exhibited a significant improvement as the country’s externaldebt-to-GDP ratio settled at 23.7 percent as of end-September 2019 compared to about 60.0percent in the mid-2000s.Given that the bulk of the country’s external debt remains in medium and long-term maturityprofile and are fixed interest rate bearing, debt repayment schedule is more manageable andfinancially viable.Ladies and gentlemen, the best is yet to come for the Philippine economy.Prospects for the economy in the near and medium-term continue to be bright. Robustmonetary, financial and external sectors are expected to continue to lend support to the country’sgrowth despite external threats and domestic challenges.External risks to the country’s growth and inflation outlook in 2020 and over the medium-term include:the threat of a synchronized global economic slowdown;retreat to multilateralism;rising geopolitical tensions, notably between the US and Iran; adoption of protectionistpolicies in major economies (still high trade barriers between US and China, Brexit, etc.);and the recent coronavirus outbreak which has been declared as “global health emergency”by the World Health Organization (WHO).In the domestic front, the failure to enhance disaster resilience amid increased intensity andfrequency of natural hazards and the failure deliver the planned Build. Build. Build projects areamong the key challenges that are on our radar screen.In the greater scheme of things, where does the BSP enter in the picture? What are the BSP’spolicy thrusts to contribute in the collective goal of ensuring that the Philippine economy stays ontrack – sustaining the growth and inflation dynamics – in 2020 and beyond?The answer is simple.The BSP will continue to pursue necessary policy measures and structural reforms to ensurethat it will be able to deliver on its mandates. That is, to promote and maintain price stability, astrong financial system, and a safe and efficient payments and settlements system conducive toa sustainable and inclusive growth of the economy.And with the passage of Republic Act No. 11211, or the ‘New Central Bank Act’ last year, you canbe assured that we will remain steadfast to its expanded mandates.  We will ensure theimplementation the reforms provided in the Act to improve BSP’s corporate viability and to alignits operations with global best practices in central banking.For instance, the restoration of the central bank’s authority to issue its own debt papers too, hasprovided the BSP an additional policy instrument at its disposal. The BSP is already in the final 4 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
stage of crafting the policy framework for its debt securities issuances which is scheduled tobegin in the third quarter of the year.In addition, the restoration of the BSP’s authority to obtain data from any private person or entity,from the public and private sectors, for policymaking purposes establishes a stronger prudentialregulatory framework which helps promote a safe and sound financial systemThe amendment likewise empowers further the BSP to oversee the country’s payment andsettlement systems (PSS) including critical financial market infrastructures that are vitalcomponents of the Payments and Settlement Systems.Looking ahead, the BSP will continue to pursue the achievement of its mandates and objectivesparticularly in the advent of  the “fourth industrial revolution”.Our goal is to continue to leverage on emerging digital innovations –use of blockchaintechnology, fintech, mobile payments, and digital currencies, among others– to promote a moreefficient and inclusive financial system.We want to foster an enabling ecosystem, bound by parameters set by BSP as a financialregulator, where responsible innovations are encouraged to thrive and expand. In doing so, wealso engage other central banks who are keen on pursuing similar policies.Recently, on February 3, 2020, the BSP signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with theBank of Indonesia on cooperation in the area of payment systems and digital financial innovation.The MOU aims to provide a framework for closer cooperation between the two central banks toachieve a more secure, efficient, and reliable payment system, and to promote digital financialinnovation.The BSP believes that promoting safe, innovative and affordable financial products and servicesthrough digitalization promotes greater financial inclusion. In turn, this will enhance economicgrowth as millions of Filipinos will now have access to various online financial products andservices.In closing, let me leave you with some key take-aways.The Philippine economy in 2020 is expected to sustain its strong growth – stable inflationdynamics that it has been posting in recent decade.The domestic economy has sufficient buffers from possible external shocks that may arisefrom recent global uncertainties.Robust monetary, financial, and external sectors are expected to continue to supporteconomic growth in 2020 and over the medium term.The BSP is committed to promote and maintain price stability, a stable financial system, anda safe and efficient payments and settlements system conducive to a strong sustainableand inclusive growth of the economy. 5 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
           I would like to thank Daisy McGregor, Nicola Anderson, David Aikman, Caspar Siegart and Victoria Monro for assistance in preparing these remarks and Wayne Chapman, Kate Stratford, Jon Bridges, Matt Waldron and Alina Barnett for their research and analysis.     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 1        The Grand Unifying Theory (and practice) of Macroprudential Policy  Speech given by Mark Carney Governor of the Bank of England  Logan Hall, University College London 5 March 2020   
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 2  2   I. Introduction Economists suffer from physics envy. We covet its neat equations and crave its deterministic systems.  This inevitably leads to disappointment. The economy isn’t deterministic.  People aren’t always rational.  Human creativity, frailty, exuberance and pessimism all contribute to economic and financial cycles. As the great physicist, Sir Isaac Newton, lamented, “I can calculate the motions of celestial bodies, but not the madness of people.” Newton’s exasperation came after he had lost a fortune investing in the South Sea company, or, with the wisdom of hindsight - after he had speculated on a bubble. Just as people can go from rational to “mad” in a boom, theoretical physics itself isn’t quite as neat as Newton had thought, for it has been discovered that Newtonian mechanics break down at the subatomic level.  But physicists are not easily daunted.  Their hottest fields, such as String Theory, are part of a quest for a theory that unifies Newton and the neutron—a Grand Unifying Theory of Everything that Matters.  One that can explain the motions of both heavenly bodies and subatomic particles. I am on a similar quest this evening.  My topic is one of the hottest fields in economic policy—macroprudential policy.  A field that has something in common with Newton, for part of the responsibilities of macroprudential policy is to protect the economy from the madness of people. Macroprudential policy is as core to the responsibilities of central banks as their much better known twin, monetary policy.  Both are fundamental to the value of money.   The relative simplicity of the monetary policy objective and the relatively focused arsenal of monetary policymakers improve the likelihood that agents in the economy can understand the MPC’s reaction function and anticipate its actions, making its job of achieving price stability somewhat easier.1 This evening I would like to improve the understanding of the FPC’s reaction function by placing its objectives and policies in a more consistent theoretical framework.  A common framework can better explain seemingly disparate macroprudential policies and can guide future policy actions.  This will be important if, as has happened all too frequently in the past, either a prolonged period of growth or the emergence of new                                                       1 See ‘Guidance, Contingencies and Brexit’, speech by Mark Carney given at the Society of Professional Economists, 24 May 2018. 
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 3  3   era thinking threaten to take financial stability for granted once again, thereby sowing the seeds of a future crisis. II. The Triumph (and Tragedy) of Monetary Policy Newton famously and humbly observed, “If I have seen farther, it is by standing on the shoulders of Giants.”  So too it is with macroprudential policy, a framework that owes a great debt to insights and initiatives of my predecessor, Lord King. The UK’s macroprudential policy framework today stands on the shoulder of the UK’s monetary policy framework first set up in 1998. In the UK, from 1971 to 1992, inflation was high - averaging 9%, and volatile, with a standard deviation of 5.4%. This distorted price signals, inhibited investment, damaged the productive potential of the economy, and hurt those least well-off. It contributed to high and volatile unemployment, which averaged 7.8% with a standard deviation of 2.8%. Although the value of low and stable inflation was widely recognised, delivering it proved challenging.  This was because the instrument that affects inflation most powerfully – monetary policy – also affects output and employment, at least in the short run.  This tempted authorities, influenced by governments, to promise low inflation in the future, but then to renege in order to boost activity.  Electoral cycles reinforced this predisposition.  Firms and households began to anticipate these incentives, and eventually pre-empt them. This time inconsistency was resolved by first having society choose the preferred rate of inflation, and then delegating operational responsibility to the monetary authority to take the necessary monetary actions to achieve that objective.  By “tying the hands” of authorities, better outcomes for both inflation and unemployment became possible. The Bank of England Act in 1998 represented the most comprehensive adoption of these insights.  The Act clarified the Bank’s responsibilities, encoded in the MPC’s remit, and granted independence to the Bank for the operation of monetary policy.  In delegating authority to an independent body, the Act ensured the Bank would operate under ‘constrained’ rather than ‘unfettered’ discretion.  It would be accountable to Parliament for operating the instruments of monetary policy to achieve the objectives of monetary policy, as determined by the Government. 2 · · · · · The MPC’s current monetary policy remit requires it to achieve price stability, defined by the Government as 12-month CPI inflation of 2%.  This inflation target is symmetric and applies at all times.                                                       2 For further information, see ‘Lambda’, speech by Mark Carney given at the London School of Economics, 16 January 2017, and ‘A Framework for All Seasons?’, speech by Mark Carney given at the Bank of England Research Workshop on The Future of Inflation Targeting, 9 January 2020. 
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 4  4   The remit also recognises that inflation may deviate temporarily from the target on account of shocks, and since 2013 it explicitly recognises that in these circumstances, bringing inflation back to target too rapidly could cause volatility in output and employment that is undesirable.  The remit requires the MPC to consider, balance and explain such short-run monetary policy trade-offs. The manner in which the MPC optimises these trade-offs can be represented in “linear-quadratic” form – a set of linear constraints describing the behaviour of the economy, and quadratic preferences that penalise deviations of inflation from its target and output from its potential.  The relative weight the policymaker places on output stabilisation, relative to inflation stabilisation, is often denoted 𝜆 – or ‘lambda’.  The policymaker’s objective function can be described as the following “loss function”: min{𝑟𝑡+𝑖}𝑖=0𝑇ℒ𝑡≡𝐸𝑡{∑𝛽𝑖[(𝜋𝑡+𝑖−𝜋∗)2+λ(𝑦𝑡+𝑖−𝑦𝑡+𝑖∗)2]𝐻𝑖=𝑜}  where 𝜋𝑡 is inflation, 𝜋∗ is the inflation target, 𝑦𝑡 is output and 𝑦𝑡∗ is ‘trend’ output, so that 𝑦𝑡−𝑦𝑡∗ is the output gap, 𝑟𝑡 is the nominal interest rate – the policy instrument, 𝛽 is the discount factor and 𝑡 subscripts denote time periods. 𝐻 is 3-5 years after which the monetary policy transmission mechanism fades. The policymaker’s objective is to minimise the discounted sum of losses over time.   In this formulation, a lambda of zero would imply no weight on the stabilisation of real activity – so-called “inflation nutter” preferences.  When lambda is positive, the policymaker is willing to strike some trade-off between output and inflation stabilisation, as directed by the MPC remit.  This objective function is optimised subject to the constraints implied by the aggregate behaviour of the economy, including the relationship between interest rates and activity; and the relationship between activity and inflation – the Phillips curve.   Under this simple framework, in certain circumstances, the optimal policy balances overshoots of the inflation target with shortfalls of activity relative to potential, and vice versa for inflation undershoots.  The relative size of these two deviations is governed by the strength with which higher output translates into higher inflation; and the preferences of the policymaker, or:  𝜋𝑡−𝜋∗=−λκ(𝑦𝑡−𝑦𝑡∗) 
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 5  5   where κ is the slope of the Philips curve, the effect of the output gap on inflation.3   From this, it is clear that the higher is lambda, the greater the weight placed on output stabilisation and the more a given shock is allowed to flow through to inflation. As lambda shrinks to zero, the policymaker forces all of the adjustment to a shock through the output gap in order to keep inflation very close to the target. The slope of the trade-off is also affected by that of the Phillips curve.  When the Phillips curve is flatter, a given output gap results in a larger inflation over- or under-shoot.  Intuitively, a flat Phillips curve raises the output costs associated with changing inflation.  · · · · · Such inflation-targeting frameworks, adopted around the world, have been highly successful.  Two decades prior to monetary policy independence in the UK, inflation averaged over 6% (Table 1). Since independence, it has been close to 2% and one-fifth as volatile. The unemployment rate fell by around 2 percentage points in the post-independence period. Its standard deviation was cut in half.  And fifteen years of sustained economic growth followed. Table 1: Inflation lower and less volatile since MPC independence   Annual CPI inflation Inflation volatility Four-quarter GDP growth Four-quarter GDP growth volatility Unemployment rate Real wage growth Pre-inflation targeting (1972-1992) 9.0 5.4 2.2 2.9 7.8 0.8 Start of inflation targeting to MPC independence  (1993- 1997Q2) 2.3 0.4 2.9 0.7 9.0 0.3 MPC independence to crisis (1997Q3 - 2007) 1.6 0.5 3.0 0.9 5.4 0.7 2008 - end 2012 3.3 1.0 0.0 2.7 7.4 -0.3 2013 - present 1.7 1.0 2.0 0.5 5.2 0.2 However, with time, the initially healthy focus on price stability became a dangerous distraction.  Against this serene backdrop of “the Great Moderation”, a storm was brewing.                                                        3 This is the time-consistent optimal policy in the textbook New-Keynesian model with purely forward-looking IS and Phillips curves.  See Clarida, R, Gali, J and Gertler, M (1999), “The Science of Monetary Policy: A New Keynesian Perspective”, Journal of Economic Literature, December. 
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 6  6   The changes adopted by many central banks around the world in the late 1990s effectively narrowed their focus, reflecting the belief that price stability was the best contribution a central bank could make to macroeconomic stability, and by extension to the broader public good. Although there were tremendous innovations during this period, this reductionist vision of a central bank’s role was structurally flawed. In particular, this narrow focus failed to recognise that financial stability is as important an objective of macroeconomic policy as price stability. Central banks have a vital role in maintaining financial stability because of the deep underlying connection between it and monetary stability.  Both are fundamentally about maintaining the public trust and confidence in money and the financial intermediation that is essential to oil the wheels of commerce.  That trust and confidence can be undermined through a loss of certainty about the future value of money, a loss of confidence in financial intermediaries, or ultimately a loss of faith in the financial system. The financial crisis was a powerful reminder of the imperative of financial stability.  After years of low and stable inflation, it became obvious that central banks had won the war only to lose the peace. The costs were enormous.  The complete loss of confidence in private finance that occurred in 2008 could only be arrested by public support that totalled $15 trillion in bail-outs, government guarantees of bank liabilities and special central bank liquidity schemes. In the UK, real wages have just surpassed their 2007 level.  Trust in the system collapsed. In the wake of the crisis, the traditional model of central banking was reinstated and modernised.  In the UK, monetary and financial stability were re-united at the Bank of England when the Chancellor in 2010 created the Financial Policy Committee (FPC) and granted it responsibility for setting macroprudential policy. Operating monetary and financial stability functions within the same institution improve information synergies, and policy coordination.  And it boosts the credibility of each policy function, amplifying their effectiveness since each can focus on their comparative advantage - monetary policy on demand management and macroprudential policy on systemic stability.    
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 7  7   III. The Advent of Macroprudential Policy  The raison d’être of macroprudential policy is to ensure the financial system supports the economy. That requires the financial system to be strong enough to continue lending to households and businesses when economic shocks occur.  And it means that macroeconomic downturns are not made worse because of unsustainable debt burdens.4 To accomplish these goals, macroprudential authorities concentrate on systemic risks – that is, those large enough to materially impact growth. Such systemic risks fall broadly into two camps: cyclical and structural.  Cyclical risks are the tendencies for financial conditions to loosen and debt to build up over time when the economy strengthens and people become more complacent. This cycle typically starts with a fundamentally positive development, such as new markets or a new technology of broad application. The ensuing period of prosperity and macroeconomic stability leads borrowers and lenders to make increasingly optimistic assumptions about the future such as “house prices can only go up” or “financial innovation has reduced risk.”  Debt and asset prices build, reinforcing each other for a time. The resulting vulnerabilities are only exposed when economic conditions turn.  When they do, lenders hastily revise their expectations for the future – the “Minksy moment” – and pull back on lending.  Borrowers reduce spending, or in extremis, default.  These responses make the economic downturn much deeper and more prolonged. Structural risks are systemic risks that do not vary with the cycle.  They generally relate to interconnections and concentrations within the financial system but can also arise from the structure of financial contracts or regulations.  For example, if financial institutions have a web of exposures to each other, an issue at one institution can set off a chain-reaction through the system.  Or if several firms are exposed to the same market, problems in that market can be amplified because of how these firms react.  Risks will also be higher if structurally weak investment vehicles, prone to fire sale their assets, play a meaningful role in important markets.  And structurally deficient market infrastructure increases the complexity and opaqueness of markets, making risks harder to identify. Over the past decade, a flurry of macroprudential policy actions have been taken to address the fault lines that caused the crisis including raising bank capital minima and buffers, introducing liquidity buffers for banks, reducing bank interconnectedness and improving their resolvability, targeted restrictions on mortgage                                                       4 Macroprudential policy is distinct from microprudential policy. Microprudential policy concentrates on promoting the safety and soundness of individual institutions.  Macroprudential policy addresses risks arising from interactions between institutions and sectors within the financial system, and interactions between the financial system and the real economy.  
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 8  8   lending, transforming fragile OTC derivative markets, and winding down the toxic forms of shadow banking and building up more resilient market-based finance (Chart 1).5  And with these policies have come a flurry of speeches too (Chart 2). Chart 1: Increasing use of macroprudential meaures over time Chart 2: Flurry of macroprudential policy speeches post-crisis  Bars show the average number of macroprudential measures per year and per 10 economies in each group of economies.     Sources for both charts: Bank of International Settlements What do these actions have in common?  What guides the choice of macroprudential policy tools and their calibration?  Is there a unifying framework that articulates success for macroprudential policy? There are several reasons why defining a unifying framework for macroprudential policy is more complex than for monetary policy. First, the gravitational pull of monetary policy is greater because its performance is easier to monitor. But whereas the objective of monetary policy—price stability—is readily and frequently observed, the objective of macroprudential policy—financial stability—is most easily defined in its absence.  Financial stability is the opposite of the financial instability of bust, crises and panics.6   Second, macroprudential policymakers deploy a large number of very different tools in order to address a wide range of systemic risks.                                                        5 See ‘True Finance – Ten years after the financial crisis’, speech by Mark Carney given at the Economic Club of New York, 19 October 2018. 6 While most definitions of financial stability are based on its absence, a positive definition of financial stability would be the sustainable provision of financial services, and confidence in the financial system to withstand future shocks without major disruption to those services, where these are integral to the real economy’s pursuit of strong and sustainable economic growth.  024681012141995-20002001-062007-122013-18AEsEMEsUseof macroprudential measures over time050100150200250199820000204060810121416Number of speeches
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 9  9   In contrast, in the pursuit of price stability, central banks deploy a handful of policies, primarily changes in interest rates and purchases of assets, that all relate to the current and future price of money. Third, the time horizons are different.  The costs of macroprudential interventions can be felt today but their benefits are often realised far into the future.   And fourth, these benefits – moderating downturns and avoiding crises – are not directly observable.  The bad outcomes that macroprudential policies prevent have to be estimated. But counterfactuals are difficult to sell: “it could have been worse” doesn’t quite have the ring of “you’ve never had it so good.”   All these complexities and uncertainties make it challenging to implement macroprudential policies and harder to communicate the rationales for them. Over time, and particularly during good times, these challenges can feed a bias towards inaction.  As memories of the last crisis fade, complacency sets in and pressures to ease policies re-emerge. When it comes to financial stability, success is an orphan.   These tendencies can be exacerbated by similar time inconsistency problems to those that plague monetary policy.  Lighter-touch regulation can be a powerful tool for authorities to boost near-term growth, a temptation that is reinforced by governments motivated by electoral cycles and the complacency curve of the financial cycle.  In the long-run, the cost of such indulgence is financial and macroeconomic instability, bringing fiscal strains, lower growth, and higher unemployment. It is not surprising that across 800 years of economic history, financial crises occur roughly once a decade (Chart 3). Chart 3: Financial crises occur with fairly regular frequency Proportion of countries with banking crises, weighted by share of world income  Sources: Reproduced from Reinhart, C, and Rogoff, K (2013), “Banking crises: An equal opportunity menace”, Journal of Banking and Finance, vol 37(11), pp. 4557-4573  
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 10  10   Creating a unifying framework for macroprudential policy can help to break this dreary cycle, guide policymakers and improve the understanding and effectiveness of macroprudential policy.  It can also promote self-reinforcing behaviour within the private financial sector, just as with credible monetary policy.  And a clearer framework will improve the transparency and accountability of the FPC to parliament and the people we serve. IV. Grand Unifying Theory of Macroprudential Policy The FPC is accountable to Parliament for operating the instruments of macroprudential policy to achieve the objectives of macroprudential policy, as determined by the Government.  Society chooses the ends, and, within pre-set boundaries, the FPC determines the means to achieve them. The FPC framework mirrors that of the MPC because of the time-inconsistency problems.  The (often) long lag between boosting growth today and the damage it does in the future makes an even stronger case for delegating operational responsibility for macroprudential policy to an independent authority than for monetary policy.  The FPC’s responsibilities are encoded in the Bank of England Act and the Chancellor’s annual FPC remit letter.7  The FPC’s primary objective is to identify, monitor and take action to remove or reduce systemic risks with a view to protecting and enhancing the resilience of the UK’s financial system.8  Subject to meeting their primary objective, the FPC has a secondary objective to “support the economic policy of Her Majesty’s Government, including its objectives for growth and employment”. The emphasis on supporting economic growth over the medium to long term is underpinned by the so-called “stability of the graveyard clause” in the Bank of England Act, which does not “required or authorised the Committee to exercise its functions in a way that would in its opinion be likely to have a significant adverse effect on the capacity of the financial sector to contribute to the growth of the UK economy in the medium or long term”. The FPC’s actions support its secondary objective in several ways. The FPC minimises the negative impact of financial stability policies on growth including in the near-term by implementing financial stability policies gradually, and by choosing targeted policy tools.  The FPC’s remit letter also tasks the FPC with taking actions to promote actively productive finance and growth as long as these actions do not compromise the primary objective of financial stability. These actions                                                       7 The Chancellor’s annual “Remit and Recommendations” letters to the FPC, alongside the FPC’s responses, are available here.  8 The Chancellor’s annual remit letter sets out that the ultimate purpose of pursuing this objective is that “a strong and stable financial system supports economic growth, facilitates the provision of finance to support the expansion of the economy’s productive capacity and underpins the UK’s position as an important global financial centre”.  
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 11  11   could include those that increase the efficiency of financial services, level the playing field between existing firms and new entrants, or that support the development of new products and markets. The FPC’s setting of macroprudential policy can be broadly characterised as minimising the loss function, ℒ: min𝜌𝑡ℒ≡𝐸𝑡{∑𝛽𝑖𝑇𝑖=0[𝑓(𝐺@𝑅𝑡+𝑖)−𝜙𝑦𝑡+𝑖]}  where 𝜌𝑡 is a policy setting at time t, 𝐸𝑡 probability-weights all future states of the world conditional on information available at time t, 𝛽 is the discount factor, 𝑇 is the FPC’s time horizon, which should be thought of as representing the medium-to-long term, and 𝑓′(·)<0 and 𝑓′′(·)>0. The FPC’s primary objective is captured by the first term, 𝐺@𝑅𝑡+𝑖 , “GDP-at-risk”.9  This is the far-left tail of the forecast distribution of GDP, and is a summary measure of the impact of tail risks on the economy.  GDP-at-risk can be thought of as the consequence of financial instability.10    𝐺𝐷𝑃𝑡+𝑖 is the central GDP forecast, which will over time be determined by the economy’s trend rate of growth. This will be influenced in the medium to long term by macroprudential policies that impact the efficiency of the financial system and through it aggregate productivity. · · · · · Comparing the FPC’s objective function with the more familiar monetary policy objective function helps illustrate the operation of macroprudential policy: 1. Clarity of objectives. The primary objective of the FPC, financial stability, can only be estimated; whereas that of the MPC, inflation, can be readily measured.  As a consequence, FPC performance is best judged in the short term by intermediate indicators and drivers of financial stability; 2. Impact on growth.  Although both committees are tasked with promoting the government’s economic objectives subject to achievement of their primary objectives, the MPC has very limited ability to influence trend growth.  The MPC’s trade-offs, when they occur, are to limit excessive short term volatility in output and inflation, particularly in “exceptional circumstances,” circumstances that only extend modestly the policy horizon.  In contrast, the FPC is more likely to face trade-offs between short term growth and its actions to achieve its primary objective.  And the FPC can have                                                       9 The recent interest in this concept is based on work by Tobias Adrian and co-authors (Adrian, T, Boyarchenko, N and Giannone, D (2019), ‘Vulnerable Growth’, American Economic Review, 109(4)).  For a discussion, see this article by Steve Cecchetti and Kim Schoenholtz. 10 Throughout this speech, deteriorations / worse outcomes for GDP-at-risk are referred to as when GDP-at-risk is increasing / high. Conversely, throughout this speech, more favourable outcomes are when GDP-at-risk is smaller / low. 
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 12  12   potentially important impacts on longer term trend growth, both because financial crises have permanent scarring effects and because promoting productive finance can improve longer run productivity.   3. Time horizon.  The time horizon for FPC optimisation is longer than that of the MPC reflecting the longer duration of the financial cycle, the permanent impact of structural macroprudential policies, and long-run monetary neutrality. Whereas the impacts of macroprudential policy could easily extend out a decade; in practice, the relevant time horizon for monetary policy would rarely extend beyond 3-5 years. Taking these in turn. 1. Clarity of objectives A term-by-term comparison of the monetary loss function: min{𝑟𝑡+𝑖}𝑖=0𝑇ℒ𝑡≡𝐸𝑡{∑𝛽𝑖[(𝜋𝑡+𝑖−𝜋∗)2+λ(𝑦𝑡+𝑖−𝑦𝑡+𝑖∗)2]𝐻𝑖=𝑜} and the macroprudential loss function: min𝜌𝑡ℒ𝑡≡𝐸𝑡{∑𝛽𝑖𝑇𝑖=0[𝑓(𝐺@𝑅𝑡+𝑖)−𝜙𝑦𝑡+𝑖]}  underscores the greater uncertainty inherent in macroprudential policy. The monetary policymaker’s loss function is based on two clearly specified and observable variables – inflation and output.  Monetary policy has a single, quantifiable inflation target, 𝜋∗, and while potential output 𝑦𝑡∗ must be estimated, there are well-developed and reasonably robust methods to do so.  In contrast, the macroprudential policymaker’s loss function has no simply defined target – instead the policymaker has to make a judgement about when GDP-at-risk is within an acceptable range. GDP-at-risk, 𝐺@𝑅𝑡+𝑖, is not directly observable and must be estimated.  And optimising for policy, 𝜌𝑡, requires estimating 𝐺@𝑅𝑡+𝑖 with and without policy, or for different policy calibrations – building estimates upon estimates. The fog of financial stability can be dangerous. A booming economy can give the illusion of lower risk, feeding assumptions that potential growth is stronger and GDP-at-risk lower. Proving otherwise can be difficult in the face of inherent uncertainty and growing complacency. 
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 13  13   As GDP-at-risk is not directly observable, it must be estimated using intermediate indicators and drivers of financial stability.11  Bank of England research finds that the indicators with greatest signalling power for GDP-at-risk are credit metrics, the current account, asset prices and metrics of banking system resilience.12  Chart 4 plots the estimated contribution of these indicators to GDP-at-risk over time. Specifically it shows the 5th percentile of the estimated forecast distribution of the level of UK GDP in t+3 years’ time, conditional on risks at time t. The focus on 3 years ahead reflects lags between setting macroprudential policy and the full impact of that policy on GDP-at-risk. Chart 4: Intermediate indicators suggest UK risks around standard(a)  Sources: Aikman et al., (2019), Bank of International Settlements, UK house price index, Datastream, Office of National Statistics, Bank calculations. The black line shows that the average 5th percentile GDP draw in the UK historically is 0% growth. Estimates of GDP-at-risk for any time period t utilise the full series of data available (and not just the data that would have been available had it been estimated at t).                                                         11 See Aikman, D, Bridges, J, Burgess, S, Galletly, R, Levina, I, O’Neill, C, and Varadi, A, (2018) ‘Measuring risks to UK financial stability’, Bank of England Staff Working Paper No. 738; and Bridges, J, Jackson, C, and McGregor, D, (2017) ‘Down in the slumps: the role of credit in five decades of recessions’, Bank of England Staff Working Paper No. 659. 12 See Aikman, D, Bridges, J, Hacioglu Hoke, S, O’Neill, C, Raja, A, (2019) ‘Credit, capital and crises: a GDP-at-Risk approach’, Bank of England Staff Working Paper No. 824. 
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 14  14   Chart 5 estimates the whole forecast distribution of GDP in t+3 years’ time, conditional on the financial risk environment. The red area shows the steady growth in GDP-at-risk from 1997 to the crisis.   Chart 5: Risks grew during the Great Moderation but are now standard   [Chart 5 shows the expected distribution of the cumulative change in the level of GDP in t+3 years’ time, given the macro-financial risk environment at time t. Historical distributions are estimated using the full sample of data.] In 1998, the early days of the Great Moderation, GDP-at-risk was benign – that is, even in a tail outcome the level of GDP was expected to be higher three years out. Through the next decade, though central case GDP grew steadily, risks were gradually building. By 2007 a fifth percentile draw was expected to leave GDP 3.5% lower three years out. As the crisis hit, GDP-at-risk shrunk rapidly as risks crystallised. Since then, risks have been relatively stable reflecting post-crisis balance sheet repair, the implementation of comprehensive macroprudential frameworks, and relatively subdued economic activity (Chart 6). Chart 6: Risks grew during the Great Moderation but are now standard  [Chart 6 uses same data as Chart 5. For each distribution, shaded area denotes the tail; the line marks the 5th percentile]. 0.000.020.040.060.080.100.120.14-10-8-6-4-2024681012142007Latest1997CumulativeGDP growth over 3 years (%)Probability densityRisks increasing
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 15  15   2. Impact on growth The second set of differences between macroprudential and monetary policy concern the interaction between their objectives and growth in the short and long terms. Both monetary and macroprudential objectives apply at all times. The key difference is that the inflation target is symmetric – the monetary policymaker’s loss grows equally when inflation is either under or over the target, whereas the macroprudential policymaker’s loss function is asymmetric – increases (ie deteriorations) in GDP-at-risk are far more costly than the benefits of the reductions in GDP-at-risk. The relationship between the primary objective of financial stability and the macroprudential policymaker’s loss function can be represented by a decreasing and convex function, 𝑓(·). This means the marginal gains from taking action to protect financial stability grow as GDP-at-risk increases.  Conversely, the marginal benefit from reducing GDP-at-risk falls as tail risks decline.  This is illustrated in Chart 7. Financial risks increase moving along the curve to the right. A policy to reduce GDP-at-risk (lines A) is more valuable to the policymaker at higher levels of GDP-at-risk (line B) than lower levels (line C). The weight the macroprudential policymaker places on the central GDP forecast relative to GDP-at-risk is also determined by 𝜙 (“phi”). 𝜙 is analogous to the monetary policy’s 𝜆, the weight monetary policymakers place on output stabilisation relative to inflation stabilisation.  𝜙 is strictly greater than 0, as dictated by the “stability of the graveyard” clause in the Act that the FPC should not take action detrimental to medium-to-long term growth.13 In its annual remit letter, the emphasis the government places on this clause, and therefore the FPC’s secondary objective, can be thought of as changing 𝜙. When GDP-at-risk is high and outside an acceptable range, however, the convexity of the 𝑓(·) function dominates 𝜙 and drives the macroprudential policymaker towards an absolute (lexicographic) preference for financial stability.                                                        13 The Bank of England Act states that the FPC is not “required or authorised to exercise its functions in a way that would in its opinion be likely to have a significant adverse effect on the capacity of the financial sector to contribute to the growth of the UK economy in the medium or long term”.  
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 16  16   Chart 7: The relationship between GDP-at-risk and the macroprudential loss function is convex*  Once GDP-at-risk is within an acceptable range, the gains from taking further action to protect financial stability are modest. In this case, the secondary objective carries larger weight, and actions to boost resilience will be tempered to a greater extent by any negative impact they have on the central outlook.  Tighter regulation tends to have some cost for the central GDP forecast in the near term while the system adjusts. However, by making the system more resilient, macroprudential policy avoids a much larger hit to growth tomorrow and increases expected productive capacity in the longer term. In contrast, it is often the case for monetary policy that changes in the policy rate push both domestically-generated output and inflation in the same direction (for example an increase in the policy rate would, all else equal, reduce both output and inflation, and vice versa)—so-called Divine Coincidence.  For monetary policy, trade-offs instead can arise from exogenous trade-off-inducing supply shocks. In these exceptional circumstances, the remit instructs the MPC to balance the trade-off between the speed at which inflation is returned to target and the support that monetary policy provides to jobs and activity. The UK has experienced a series of such shocks since the global financial crisis, during which a large adjustment to the supply side of the economy has meant a lower exchange rate, lower growth, and higher inflation (Chart 8). In contrast, the US and the euro area have generally faced Divine Coincidence since the global financial crisis (Charts 9 and 10) Tail risks increasing (GDP-at-risk worsening) as move further right Social cost of financial instability:  𝑓 (GDP-at-risk) A B A C 
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 17  17   Chart 8: Divine Coincidence in the UK pre-crisis, but rarely post-crisis   Charts 9 and 10: Divine Coincidence generally held in the US (left chart) and euro area (right chart)    Source for Charts 8-10: Bureau of Economic Analysis, CBO, Eurostat, IMF and Bank calculations.     -20246-5-4-3-2-1012Pre-financial crisisFinancial crisis and afterOutput gap (%)Inflation (%)-5-4-3-2-1012345-8-6-4-2024Pre-financial crisisFinancial crisis and afterOutput gap Inflation (%)-1-0.500.511.522.533.544.5-4.00-2.000.002.004.00Pre-financial crisisFinancial crisis and afterOutput gap Inflation (%)
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 18  18   3. Time horizon Although both committees must promote the government’s economic objectives subject to achievement of their primary objectives, the MPC has very limited ability to influence trend growth.  Monetary policy transmission impacts fade after 3-5 years. In contrast, the FPC can have a potentially important influence on longer-term, trend growth, both because financial crises have permanent scarring effects and because promoting productive finance can improve longer run productivity. Financial cycles last an average of 16 years, about twice as long and twice as big as business cycles.14,15 As a consequence the appropriate setting for macroprudential policy 𝜌𝑡 is more sensitive to discount factor 𝛽 than is the case for monetary policy. The appropriate rate at which to discount future costs and benefits of macroprudential actions is the social rate of time preference – the importance society places on future consumption relative to consumption today. One simple reason for this discount rate is that future generations will be wealthier than those currently alive, so £1 in the future will be worth less than £1 today.  A more controversial reason is that individuals display an element of impatience in their decisions – something economists call a “pure time discount”.  There is an ethical debate about the extent to which this preference for the present should be reflected when evaluating policies whose impact will be felt over long horizons, including by future generations.16 I will return to these issues of inter-generational equity shortly. V. The Grand Unifying Theory of Macroprudential Policy in practice Since its formation in 2011, the FPC have put in place a variety of policy measures ranging from bank capital and liquidity requirements to housing policy tools. More recently, the FPC has taken a series of measures to address potential disruptions to financial services because of disorderly Brexit; to support a smooth transition in benchmark interest rates from Libor to SONIA; to address risks from open-ended funds and have also put in place structural measures to address risks from climate change.                                                       14 As well, both the duration and amplitude of financial cycles has increased since the mid-1980s. For empirical evidence on financial cycles, see:  Drehmann, M, Borio, C and Tsatsaronis, K (2012), “Characterising the financial cycle: don’t lose sight of the medium term”, BIS Working Papers 380;  Claessens, S, Kose, M and Terrones, M (2012), ‘How do business and financial cycles interact?’, Journal of International Economics’, Volume 87;  and Aikman, D, Haldane, A, and Nelson, B (2013), “Curbing the credit cycle”, The Economic Journal, June.  15 Claudio Borio defines the financial cycle as “self-reinforcing interactions between perceptions of value and risk, attitudes towards risk and financing constraints, which translate into booms followed by busts. These interactions can amplify economic fluctuations and possibly lead to serious financial distress and economic dislocations.”  See Borio, C (2014), “The financial cycle and macroeconomics: what have we learnt?”, Journal of Banking & Finance, vol 45, pp 182-98, August. 16 This debate is an old one.  Arthur Pigou described government as “the trustee for unborn generations as well as for its present citizens”; Frank Ramsey referred to pure time preference discounting as “a practice which is ethically indefensible and arises merely from weakness of the imagination”. 
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 19  19   While this menu of policies may at first appear disparate and unconnected, every action is consistent with the FPC’s objective function by reducing GDP-at-risk, without undue impact on the central GDP forecast. This ensures that: - the financial system is strong enough to continue lending to households and businesses when economic shocks occur;  - macroeconomic downturns are not made worse because of unsustainable debt burdens, and the financial system supports the economy. The FPC’s structural mortgage market requirements The FPC’s housing tools are a textbook example of how the FPC reduces GDP-at-risk while minimising any negative impact on the central forecast for GDP by choosing targeted, efficient policy tools. min𝜌𝑡ℒ𝑡≡𝐸𝑡{∑𝛽𝑖𝑇𝑖=0[𝑓(𝐺@𝑅𝑡+𝑖)−𝜙𝑦𝑡+𝑖]}  In 2014 the FPC introduced an ‘LTI flow limit’, a 15% limit on the share of new mortgages that banks could extend over a loan-to-income ratio of 4.5 times a borrower’s income, and an Affordability Test requiring lenders to assess whether borrowers could still afford their loan if the mortgage rate rose to 3pp above its reversion rate.17  This is a structural macroprudential intervention designed to remain in place through housing market cycles.18 The FPC’s housing tools are based on analysis of how much this policy would reduce GDP-at-risk in the steady state, relative to any impact on GDP. There is now a rich body of evidence that rapid build-ups in mortgage debt increase GDP-at-risk by making downturns both deeper and longer. This relationship is robust across different countries, and across time (Chart 11).19                                                        17 The two tools were calibrated to be broadly consistent with one another.  18  Factors relevant for the calibration of the affordability test (and, by extension, the LTI flow limit given the consistency of calibration between the two) were discussed in the FPC’s 2019 housing review (see December 2019 Financial Stability Report). 19 See, for example, Bridges, J, Jackson, C, and McGregor, D, (2017) ‘Down in the slumps: the role of credit in five decades of recessions’, Bank of England Staff Working Paper No. 659 for cross-country evidence; Mian, A, and Sufi, A (2010), “Household leverage and the recession of 2007 to 2009”, IMF Economic Review 58, pp74-117; Kovacs, A, Rostom, M, and Bunn, P (2018), “Consumption response to aggregate demand shocks and the role of leverage”, Centre for Macroeconomics Discussion Paper 1820, for UK cohort evidence; and Baker, S, (2018), “Debt and the response to household income shocks: validation and application to linked financial account data”, Journal of Political Economy 126(4), pp1504-1557 for US household-level evidence.   
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 20  20   Chart 11: Relationship between household debt and downturns robust across countries and time  Source: Aikman, D, Bridges, J, Kashyap, A, and Siegert, C (2019), “Would macroprudential regulation have prevented the last crisis?”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Winter. This is because highly indebted households are more likely to cut their consumption sharply to keep paying their mortgages, deepening the economic downturn (Chart 12).  Given this evidence, the Bank of England tracks a range of intermediate indicators of GDP-at-risk created by build-ups in mortgage debt including housing market activity, credit growth, price and non-price lending terms, and household vulnerability indicators like the distributions of debt-service, loan-to-income and loan-to-value ratios. Chart 12: Highly indebted borrowers restrict consumption more in downturns   Sources: Living Costs and Food (LCF) Survey, ONS and Bank calculations.  -25-20-15-10-500 to 11 to 22 to 33 to 4≥4Percentagepoint changein consumption to income ratioMortgage LTIratio
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 21  21   The FPC’s housing tools could reduce GDP growth (secondary objective) in the short-term. The housing tools reduce housing activity and prices, and therefore demand as some borrowers are restricted from obtaining a mortgage. The impact on GDP is temporary however, as it can be offset by monetary policy. There are several ways that the housing tools could, in theory, impact the supply capacity of the economy. Lower mortgage availability could reduce labour mobility. Collateral values for small business loans could fall because of lower house prices. Or the LTI flow limit could increase investment if it discourages lenders from prioritising mortgages that would crowd out business lending. On balance, the Bank’s analysis and empirical studies suggest there are no strong reasons to think that the housing tools have any significant negative long-run impact on the growth of supply capacity. The housing tools will bind more when housing activity is stronger and lenders are loosening underwriting standards, increasing both the gross benefits (i.e. reducing GDP-at-risk in a downturn) and gross costs (i.e. reducing demand by excluding some borrowers from the market). To test if net benefits are positive across different states of the world the FPC reviews central, upside and boom scenarios.20 In each scenario we first estimate the distribution of borrower indebtedness absent the tools (shown in blue shading, Chart 13, for the boom scenario). This includes an assumption about how lenders’ underwriting standards would have evolved without the tools in place. A second simulation then estimates how the distribution of indebtedness evolves differently with the tools in place (shown in pink shading, Chart 13, for the boom scenario). The gross benefits of the tools arise from a reduction in GDP-at-risk associated with the less risky debt distribution with the tools in place, compared to the risker scenario without the tools. To weigh these benefits off against the costs (the temporary reduction in housing activity) requires assumptions about the persistence of each, society’s discount rate, the probability of a downturn occurring – as the benefits are only realised in a downturn, and the preferences of the policymaker (as encapsulated in parameter 𝜙).  Chart 14 provides a benchmark in which the 𝑓(·) function is assumed to be linear (an assumption that underestimates net benefits relative to a convex 𝑓(·) function) and the weight on the secondary objective, 𝜙, is set to one. It shows that the tools are likely to provide significant expected net benefits in the event of a housing boom, and these increase as the size of the housing boom increases.  In the absence of a housing boom, there are unlikely to be material costs (Chart 14).21                                                       20 To date, the Recommendations have largely acted as an insurance policy. Since they were introduced, banks, in aggregate, have been well within the 15% limit (the maximum share of high LTI lending in aggregate has been 11%). In part, this is likely to reflect the fact that the housing market has been relatively subdued since the policies were introduced. There has, however, been some ‘bunching’ of mortgages with LTIs between 4 and 4.5 suggesting that, as intended, lenders are judging it prudent for some borrowers to take smaller mortgages than may have been granted in the past. In aggregate, this bunching effect has been small. 21 Note that the benefits and costs in Charts 14 and 15 are different. Chart 14 shows a discounted sum of the expected costs and benefits in each year of a scenario. It takes into account the probability that the costs and benefits will be incurred over a given period, the relative persistence of costs and benefits, and discounts both. Chart 15 is a point-in-
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 22  22   Chart 13: The FPC’s housing tools prevent an increase in highly indebted households Chart 14: FPC housing tools have positive net benefits    Source: Bank calculations. For more information please see the Bank’s Financial Stability Report, December 2019. It is often the case that more than one policy tool could be used to reduce GDP-at-risk, but these tools tend to be blunt. More targeted policies will usually have less impact on the FPC’s secondary objective, and so will yield better overall outcomes. The grey triangles in Chart 15 estimate GDP-at-risk (proxied by the 5th percentile of the forecast distribution of GDP) in 3 years’ time, conditional on risks at time t on the x-axis, versus on the y-axis the Bank of England’s 1-year ahead median GDP forecast at time t. It estimates that if in 2004 the FPC had their housing tools in place, GDP-at-risk (x-axis, proxied by the level of GDP expected in 2007, at the 5th percentile of the forecast distribution of GDP) could have shrunk by more than one third, from -3.3% of GDP to -2.1% of GDP. The cost of this (y-axis) would have been around 0.1% of GDP per year.  By comparison, the Bank estimates that raising interest rates to achieve the same reduction in GDP-at-risk would have reduced the central forecast for GDP by 0.9% per year, a far greater cost for the same benefit, because raising interest rates impacts the whole economy. 22,23                                                                                                                                                                                   time estimate – it does not take potential persistence or probability of realising benefits into account. The costs in both charts are an upper bound, as they assume no offset to lower demand from monetary policy.  22 The MPC’s remit states that the FPC’s macroprudential tools are the first line of defence against financial stability risks.  If the FPC judges that the MPC’s attempts to keep inflation at target is exacerbating imbalances and creating a potential risk to financial stability that its macroprudential tools cannot keep in check, then the MPC may allow inflation to deviate from the target temporarily. 23 The FPC’s mortgage market Recommendations were implemented pre-emptively, ahead of risks building to elevated levels. Their calibration reflected lenders’ own practices at the time, and so acted as insurance against the risk of any future deterioration in underwriting standards. This also means that the costs to the wider economy from introducing these tools was less than it would be if more aggressive action later in the financial cycle was required.  -10123CentralUpsideBoomBenefitsCostsNet ImpactPer cent of GDP
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 23  23   Chart 15: FPC housing tools more efficient than monetary policy for addressing the same risks  The FPC’s structural and cyclical bank capital requirements The UK’s bank capital framework optimises the FPC’s objective function by balancing the impact of higher capital on GDP-at-risk with the impact of higher capital requirements on the central GDP forecast.  min𝜌𝑡ℒ𝑡≡𝐸𝑡{∑𝛽𝑖𝑇𝑖=0[𝑓(𝐺@𝑅𝒕+𝒊)−𝜙𝑦𝑡+𝑖]}  The capital framework includes structural requirements that are not designed to vary systematically over time, and a cyclical requirement that varies with the financial cycle to match the level of resilience with the level of GDP-at-risk. In a downturn, capital absorbs losses that could otherwise cause banks to restrict lending to households and businesses and make the downturn worse.  If a bank fails, capital reduces disruption to the wider economy. And the market is more likely to continue funding adequately capitalised banks.  For these reasons, higher bank capital requirements reduce both the likelihood and severity of future downturns, and so reduce GDP-at-risk in the steady state.  On the other hand, capital is relatively costly for banks to hold, which has a knock-on to the everyday cost of borrowing for households and businesses. So higher capital requirements also permanently dampen investment, productivity, and output.  1998199920002001200220032004200520062007200820102011201220132014201520162017201820190.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0-6.0-5.0-4.0-3.0-2.0-1.00.01.02.01yrahead median GDP growth forecast (%)3yrahead 5thpercentile GDP growth estimate (%, cumulative)2004IfFPC housing tools had been in placeIf monetary policy acted to achieve same reductionin GDP-at-riskRisks increasing as the GDP-at-risk tail growslarger  
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 24  24   The FPC’s 2015 Medium Term Capital Framework24 calibrated the optimal structural (non-time-varying) capital requirement for the UK banking system by estimating the level of capital where the difference between these benefits and costs are maximised in the steady state. Chart 16 shows conceptually that this is where the marginal benefit of capital (smaller GDP-at-risk) is equal to the marginal cost of capital (lower investment and output). Chart 16: Optimal capital ratio where marginal benefits equal to marginal costs*    *Diagram is stylised. The ‘gross benefits’ curve in this analysis was estimated based on the historical relationship between banking system leverage and GDP-at-risk using a dataset for 840 advanced economy banks since 1980.  To supplement this backward-looking analysis the FPC layered on a forward-looking judgement that the new bank resolution framework, put in place following the crisis, would reduce the gross benefits of capital. Holders of bank debt and equity now expect to be bailed-in if a bank is resolved, and so exert greater market discipline on banks to prudently manage their risks. This reduces the probability and severity of future crises (GDP-at-risk), and reduces the additional benefits of also adding more capital. The ‘gross costs’ were based on estimates of the relative costs of equity and debt funding, as well as macro-economic estimates of what a given increase in bank lending rates implies for growth. Both of these costs and benefits are estimated to be largely constant over time.                                                       24 “Supplement to the December 2015 Financial Stability Report: The framework of capital requirements for UK banks”, Bank of England (2015).  The analysis underpinning this framework is published in Brooke, M et al. (2015), “Measuring the macroeconomic costs and benefits of higher UK bank capital requirements”, Bank of England Financial Stability Paper No. 35, December.  
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 25  25   The FPC’s analysis pointed to an optimal range for structural capital requirements and buffers totalling 10-14% of risk-weighted assets (Chart 17). This range maximised the expected future level of GDP. The range reflects the considerable uncertainty around the estimation. Within this range, the FPC judged that a structural level of capital requirements and buffers of 11% would allow it to meet its financial stability target, and maximise the longer-term level of expected GDP.25 Chart 17: FPC’s benchmark for optimal capital requirements is 11%  In addition to this structural capital requirement, UK banks are required to hold a Countercyclical Capital Buffer (CCyB) that varies over the financial cycle, matching the level of banking system resilience to the level of risk. The CCyB was introduced internationally following the crisis, as part of the Basel III package of measures in 2011.  It better optimises the balance between the primary macroprudential policy objective to reduce GDP-at-risk, and the secondary objective to support economic growth, compared to a fixed capital requirement that does not vary with the level of risk. UK banks will be required to hold a CCyB of 2% of UK risk-weighted assets when risks are around standard – that is when risks are neither particularly elevated nor subdued.26 We can use the GDP-at-risk model to provide a lens for understanding the risk environment: for example, the 35th to 65th percentile of the historical distribution of GDP-at-risk (see Chart 4) is a range of around -0.8 to 0.8.                                                       25 At the time, the FPC also noted that there were gaps and shortcomings in the measurement of risk-weights (for example, risks associated with defined benefit pension fund deficits were not captured).  In light of this, the FPC judged at the time that the appropriate level of Tier 1 capital requirement for the UK banking system was 13.5% of risk-weighted assets, based on existing measures of risk weights.  In December 2019, the FPC reviewed the judgements underpinning this assessment, and confirmed that its 2015 benchmark remained appropriate. 26 In December 2019, the FPC announced that it was raising the level of the UK CCyB that it expects to set in a standard risk environment from the region of 1% to the region of 2%. Consistent with this, and given its assessment that risks were standard, the FPC raised the CCyB from 1% to 2%.  This takes effect with a one-year lag, and so will become a binding constraint from 16 December 2020.  For further information, see the December 2019 Financial Stability Report.  -0.12-0.1-0.08-0.06-0.04-0.0200.027891011121314151617System capital ratio (% of RWAs)Estimated cost/benefit of capitalAnnual GDP cost of moving away from the appropriate capital ratio (in % of GDP)Optimal range11% optimum
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 26  26   When there is an economic shock, the FPC can release the CCyB to 0%, reducing banks’ capital requirements. This frees up capital to absorb losses and preserve lending capacity. By continuing to lend, banks help to cushion the economic shock, and promote a quicker economic recovery.  That is, the ability to cut the CCyB reduces GDP-at-risk, improving overall welfare.27 To give you some idea of scale, a cut in the CCyB from 2% to 0% today would preserve banks’ capacity to lend to UK households and businesses by £500bn. By comparison, net lending was around £100bn over the past year. This is a stark departure from the pre-crisis framework. Banks’ capital requirements were determined by microprudential supervisors focussed on the safety of individual institutions. When shocks hit, this incentive created by a purely microprudential objective was more likely to motivate supervisors to conserve capital at all costs, with the consequence that banks restricted lending and exacerbated the macroeconomic downturn. The CCyB also supports the central GDP forecast by ensuring banks do not have to carry at all times sufficient capital for an elevated risk environment, with the associated knock-on to borrowing costs, investment, and output. For example, Bank of England work suggests that - had the current capital framework been in place before the crisis - the CCyB would need to have been between 3.5% and 5% to absorb losses. The FPC’s judgement is that, if risks were to build above standard, then increasing the CCyB above 2% and bearing this cost would better optimise the balance between primary and secondary objectives. The cost would be warranted because, by building resilience, it would reduce the likelihood and severity of future downturns.28,29  The grey triangles in Chart 18 estimate GDP-at-risk (proxied by the 5th percentile of the forecast distribution of GDP in 3 years’ time, conditional on risks at time t on the x-axis), versus on the y-axis the Bank of England’s 1-year ahead median GDP forecast at time t.  The blue line illustrates how this trade-off could have changed if in 2004 capital levels (as measured by the total capital equity ratio) had been increased from 2004 levels. GDP-at-risk in 2004 (proxied by the estimated change in the level of GDP expected by 2007, based on information in 2004, at the 5th percentile of the                                                       27 The CCyB is a particularly powerful policy tool in this regard because it can be removed altogether in a stress.  Banks entering the capital conservation buffer, by contrast, are subject to restrictions on their dividends and other capital distributions.   28The FPC’s CCyB decisions are informed by results of the Bank’s annual concurrent stress tests of the UK banking system.  These tests provide a gauge of the sensitivity of banks’ balance sheets under stress.  The FPC links the severity of the stress scenario used in its tests to its assessment of vulnerabilities in the financial system and in household and corporate balance sheets. When vulnerabilities are judged to be elevated, the scenarios used in the test will be more severe and vice versa.  29 Having a positive 2% resting rate for the CCyB when risks are standard means that the FPC is better able to increase the CCyB gradually when vulnerabilities build. Gradual increases in capital requirements are less costly than large, discrete changes, as banks are then able to generate the required capital via retained earnings.   
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 27  27   forecast distribution of GDP) could have been around a quarter less were capital levels just 1pp higher. And that the cost to the central GDP forecast of raising this capital might have been around 0.1 - 0.2pp.  Chart 18:  In 2004 increasing banks’ capital requirements would have improved the balance between GDP-at-risk and the central GDP forecast 30,31   VI. The Forward Agenda for Macroprudential Policy Addressing structural vulnerabilities in open-ended funds  Growth in market-based finance over the last decade is a fundamentally positive development that brings welcome diversity to the financial system.                                                         30 Chart 19 draws on the approach and methodology in Aikman, D, Bridges, J, Hacioglu Hoke, S, O’Neill, C, Raja, A, (2019) ‘Credit, capital and crises: a GDP-at-Risk approach’, Bank of England Staff Working Paper No. 824.  TCE stands for Total Capital Equity ratio. One difference with this paper is that we replace the y-axis with the relevant MPC forecast.  The data point for 2009 has also been removed to avoid the significantly negative year distorting the chart.  31 The model assumes a linear relationship between bank capital and GDP-at-risk. This assumption should be treated as a local approximation and is unlikely to be realistic over wide ranges of capital ratios. In particular, increases in system-wide capital levels from current high levels will ameliorate tail risk by less than similarly-sized increases when capital levels are relatively low, as they were in the immediate aftermath of the crisis. 19981999200020012002200320042005200620072008201020112012201320142015201620172018201920042004 + 1pp tce2004 + 2pp tce2004 + 3pp tce0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0-6-5-4-3-2-10121yr median vs. 3yr tail trade-off (UK)Policy frontier (2004)1yrahead median GDP growth forecast (%)3yrahead 5thpercentile GDP growth estimate (cumulative, %)Error band
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 28  28   min𝜌𝑡ℒ𝑡≡𝐸𝑡{∑𝛽𝑖𝑇𝑖=0[𝑓(𝐺@𝑅𝒕+𝒊)−𝜙𝑦𝑡+𝑖]}   However, globally more than $30 trillion of assets are now held in open-ended funds that offer short-term redemptions while investing in longer-dated and potentially illiquid assets.32 And funds with these structural mismatches are growing rapidly. This liquidity mismatch creates an advantage to investors who redeem ahead of others, particularly in stress. This “first mover advantage” could prompt a destabilising rush for the exits, not only in the market where problems first occur, but also across markets with analogous risks. Fund suspensions, a widely available tool, exacerbate the issue. Charts 19 and 20 illustrate that outflows from open-ended funds are indeed more sensitive to fund performance when funds hold more illiquid assets, and when market conditions are worse. Although risks have, so far, only crystallised within some niche managers and smaller markets, and their impact has been contained, these risks have the potential to become systemic if funds’ holdings of less liquid assets continue to grow. Chart 19: Outflows from open-ended funds more sensitive for greater holdings of illiquid assets Chart 20: Outflows from open-ended funds more sensitive when market   Source: Morningstar and Bank calculations. Source: Financial Conduct Authority, Morningstar and Bank calculations. For more information please see the Bank’s Financial Stability Report, December 2019.                                                       32 Illiquid assets are those that require a material price discount for a quick sale, or equivalently those that require a significant period for sales to avoid a material price discount.  For discussion, see the chapter on “Vulnerabilities in open-ended funds” in the Bank of England’s December 2019 Financial Stability Report.   -1.2-1-0.8-0.6-0.4-0.20AEEquityEMEEquityAE GovBondAE CorpBondCREFundsEMEBondExpectedFundFlows %  
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 29  29   Last year, the FPC established that in order to reduce the first-mover advantage, greater consistency was needed between the liquidity of a fund’s assets and its redemption terms. To achieve this, funds should apply a pricing tool, a notice period or a combination of both that reflects the liquidity of their underlying assets (Charts 22 and 23), given by the following definitions:   Liquidity measurement: The liquidity of funds’ assets should be assessed either as the price discount needed for a quick sale of a vertical slice of those assets or the time period needed for a sale to avoid a material price discount.   Pricing: Investors who redeem should receive a price for their units that reflects the discount needed to sell the required proportion of a fund’s assets in the specified redemption notice period; and   Notice period: Redemption notice periods should reflect the time needed to sell the required proportion of a fund’s assets without discounts beyond those captured in the price received by redeeming investors.  Chart 21: The FPC’s principles for fund design to deliver consistency  Chart 22: Stylised combinations of price discounts and notice periods needed to reduce incentives to redeem ahead of others   This July the FPC will publish in its Financial Stability Report an analysis of how implementing these principles would likely impact the FPC’s primary and secondary objectives.  GDP-at-risk should fall as the additional incentive for investors to liquidate assets in open-ended funds in stress is reduced. Estimating this requires simulating first-mover advantage under the status quo, then assessing the extent to which it is removed by applying the FPC’s principles. The difference must be mapped through to the impact on prices in corporate bond, bank funding and other markets, and then to the real economy. 
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 30  30   The analysis will rely on bottom-up, simulated estimates within each market rather than macro analysis, as there has never been widespread crystallisation of these risks. Early work has estimated that, for example, an initial shock of 60bps to corporate bond spreads could be amplified by a further 30% and increase GDP-at-risk (proxied by the 5th percentile of the forecast distribution of GDP) by 0.2pp. Estimating the costs and benefits will also require simulating into the future to take account of the larger size of funds. The impact of the FPC’s principles on the central forecast for GDP is harder to quantify as it depends on (unpredictable) investor behaviour.  Under current fund structures, funds with longer notice periods or discounted redemption pricing are not as attractive to investors as the apparently “costless” funds with daily liquidity.  Those structures that may look unattractive today are the very structures needed to finance investment in productive finance, such as infrastructure, the transition to a net zero economy and the financing of SMEs.  Such investments simply are poorly suited to structures offering short-notice redemption.  It follows that investors could respond to reform of fund structures by increasing investments in productive finance.  The prospect of productive finance increasing after applying the FPC’s principles would be the macroprudential equivalent of ‘Divine Coincidence’ that promotes financial stability while increasing the rate of trend growth. Global co-ordination of potential reforms will be vital.  That is why the Bank and FCA are engaging with the FSB, IOSCO and other competent authorities on the financial stability risks of asset management activity. Breaking the Tragedy of the Horizon to address the Climate Crisis The climate crisis is a Tragedy of the Horizon. The catastrophic impacts of climate change will be felt beyond the traditional horizons of most banks, investors and financial policymakers, imposing costs on future generations that the current one has no direct incentives to fix. Once climate change becomes a clear and present danger to financial stability it could already be too late to stabilise the atmosphere at two degrees. The longer adjustment is delayed, the more GDP-at-risk will grow. Catastrophic physical risks from the increased frequency and severity of climate and weather-related events will likely increase non-linearly. 
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 31  31   And late climate policy action could bring about a climate ‘Minsky moment’ when the scale of stranded assets dawns, bringing about sudden and sharp adjustments to asset prices. These risks to financial stability will be minimised if the transition begins now and follows a predictable path, thereby helping the market anticipate the transition to net zero and reducing the costs of adjustment. The policymaker’s discount rate is important to their assessment of the financial stability risks of climate change. min𝜌𝑡ℒ𝑡≡𝐸𝑡{∑𝛽𝑖𝑇𝑖=0[𝑓(𝐺@𝑅𝑡+𝑖)−𝜙𝑦𝑡+𝑖]}  Last year, the Government brought the horizon consistent with Parliament’s declaration of a climate emergency and the legislation of a UK Net Zero target for 2050. And announced in the Green Finance Strategy that from this year the FPC remit letter will require that they have regard to the COP21 Paris Agreement when considering how to advance objectives and discharge their functions.  In taking these actions, the Government has in effect reduced the FPC’s discount rate on climate-related financial risks.  This means that GDP-at-risk will now grow more quickly in the FPC’s loss function. And by responding to this, the FPC will reduce climate-related exposures, and the private financial sector will help to pull forward the adjustment to net zero for the economy as a whole.  There are three main areas macroprudential policymakers can act.33 On reporting, climate disclosure standards under the TCFD must be enhanced to be as comparable, efficient and decision-useful as possible. And we need to develop pathways to mandatory climate disclosures. To manage risks, disclosures need to go beyond the static to the strategic. The Bank of England with the PRA and FPC will run the world’s first integrated bottom-up climate stress test for banks and insurers, including the catastrophic business-as-usual scenario, the ideal – but still challenging – transition to net zero by 2050, and the late policy action climate ‘Minsky moment’ scenario including economy-wide disruption that a delayed and disorderly transition will bring. Our stress test of the world’s leading international financial centre will show how major financial firms expect to adjust their business models, as well as the potential collective impact of these responses on the wider economy.                                                       33 See Carney (2020) The Road to Glasgow, speech given 27 February 2020 at the launch of the COP26 Private Finance Agenda.  
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 32  32   The stress test will reveal the financial firms – and by extension the companies – that are preparing for the transition, and it will expose those that are not. On returns, our citizens need to be able to see whether their investments are consistent with the path to net zero. And all companies that are transitioning to net zero should be encouraged.  Asset owners and managers will increasing need to disclose whether their clients’ money is being invested in line with their values. Thus far, approaches to doing so have been inadequate. Carbon footprints are not forward-looking. Moreover, a whole economy transition isn’t about funding only deep green activities or blacklisting dark brown ones. We need fifty shades of green to catalyse and support all companies towards net zero and be able to assess collectively whether we’re “Paris aligned”. Given that net zero is both an imperative of climate physics and a commitment by 120 countries; companies, banks, insurers, pension funds and investors will increasingly be expected to develop and disclose their transition plans. For companies this could mean: - Commitment to a net zero target (for scope 1, 2 and ideally scope 3 emissions) by a specific date; - Assessment and disclosure of how the transition to a net zero business model will impact strategy; - Short-term milestones to track progress; and - Details of governance, including whether executive compensation is tied to success and how risks are managed at the board level. These actions will also support growth and the FPC’s secondary objective. By pulling forward and smoothing the adjustment to net zero, it will minimise the costs of transition. And, crucially, by revealing which companies are aligned to net zero, and which are not, these actions will reveal the immense investment opportunities from the transition to net zero, increasing productive finance for sustainable infrastructure. VII. Conclusion After engaging in an ambitious exercise to outline a Grand Unifying Theory of macroprudential policy, it is now time for a bit of humility. After all, if the experience of the financial crisis teaches us anything, it’s that we cannot anticipate every risk or plan for every contingency.  And part of good macroprudential policy is literally planning for failure. 
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 33  33   Part of our job is to create a system that is robust to both the intensification of known risks and the crystallisation of Rumsfeldian unknowns.  This is directly relevant for the current challenges associated with the coronavirus outbreak.  This is, above all else, a matter of human health and welfare.  The front line of combatting the challenges of Covid-19 comprises the extraordinary efforts of NHS health professionals, Public Health Officials and volunteers across the country, as well as the exceptional support by the FCO to UK citizens abroad. We are fortunate in this country to have the infrastructure, expertise and dedication in public health that we do.  The Bank of England’s role is to help UK businesses and households manage through an economic shock that could prove large but will ultimately be temporary. The Bank will take all necessary steps to support the UK economy and financial system, consistent with our statutory responsibilities.  Our policy arsenal includes monetary policy instruments, special liquidity facilities, and macroprudential tools. We are also coordinating with HM Treasury to ensure that any initiatives are complementary and that they will collectively have maximum impact, consistent with our independent responsibilities.   And lines of communication are wide open with our international colleagues at the G7, G20 and the IMF. While there will be differences in the exact timing and form, the collective impact of our efforts will be both powerful and timely. The Bank are monitoring the situation closely across all our functions and ensuring all necessary contingency plans are in place in the private financial sector and at the Bank of England itself. The MPC is assessing the economic impacts and considering the policy implications of various possible scenarios, including the extent to which supply disruptions have aggregate demand consequences via cash flow, cost and availability of finance, as well as confidence effects. Our PRA and FMI supervisors are also working with banks, insurers, and payment operators and clearing houses to ensure they have plans in place to maintain their operational resilience.  And finally, the FPC is examining macro-financial impacts including spillovers to market functioning and how to address any possible constraints on financing to UK businesses and households that might emerge. The Bank’s annual stress test included a severe global shock originating in Chinese where growth falls to -1.2% (Chart 23), and residential property prices fall -45%. Hong Kong’s GDP drops -7.9% and residential property prices fall -55%. As the shock broadens to global financial markets and the rest of the world, world GDP falls -2.6%. Globally this is a very severe test, with a roughly 1 in 100 likelihood of these stresses occurring together based on history.  
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 34  34   Chart 23: 2019 Bank of England stress test scenario overall more severe than the financial crisis Chart 24: 2019 Bank of England stress test scenario overall more severe than the financial crisis     Our major banks have passed this taxing stress test, just as they did a range of others in recent years.  Their resilience contributes to a high degree of financial sector preparedness for the current crystallisation of what had previously been an unknown unknown risk. We haven’t built this strength for its own sake.  It’s there to be used when needed.   This is prudence with a purpose.  Resilience with a reason. That reason is the ultimate objective that unifies the Bank of England’s monetary and financial functions – the meaning of the central banker’s life which can be found in the opening sentence of our 1694 Charter – “to promote the good of the people of the United Kingdom”. It has been my honour to do so.   -4.71.1-3.72.3-4.00.9-7.9-2.8-1.25.9-2.62.9-10-50510GDP outturnUKChinaUSEAHong Kong2019 stress test start-to-troughfall (%)World(PPP)-33.01.6-40.9-3.3-19.64.1-25.76.6-22.33.5-34.111.5-44.92.6-55.03.4-64.0-10.4-70-50-30-101030Property prices (%)UK ResidentialUS CREUK CREEuro area residentialUS residentialLatest four-quartergrowth (%)2019 stress test start-to-troughfall (%)Euro area CREChina residentialHK residentialHK CRELatest four-quarter growth (%) 
1    2њљњљ        MONETARY POLICY CONUNDRUM IN DEVELOPED ECONOMIES – IS THE REGION DIFFERENT?     Ana Mitreska, NBRNM Ljupka Georgievska FSBRR1, NBRNM Gani Ramadani MPRD2, NBRNM                                                                1 Financial Stability, Banking Regulations and Resolution Department. 2 Monetary Policy and Research Department.   NATIONAL BANK OF THE REPUBLIC OF NORTH MACEDONIA     info@nbrm.mk     www.nbrm.mk  PLATFORM FOR DISCUSSION   EVENT:   BIS Meeting of the Working Party on     Monetary Policy in Central and Eastern Europe  DATE:     20-21 February 2020  LOCATION: Becici, Montenegro 
2  Monetary Policy Conundrum in Developed Economies – is the Region Different?  Ten years after the global crisis, it is more than certain that the context for monetary policy making has not returned to the pre – crisis “normal”.  Central banks, in advanced economies in particular, have deployed unprecedented measures to ensure proper functioning of financial markets, and to provide impetus to the economy. Despite the recent global recovery, uncertainties remain elevated and possible vulnerabilities come to the fore. At the same time, certain macro-economic linkages on which conventional monetary policy making was based on have been challenged. To streamline the matter, we will tackle few important issues, which as monetary policy makers we have been faced with. First, though the monetary accommodation helped the recovery, easy financing conditions might have encouraged excessive risk-taking and building of debt vulnerabilities. Second, inflation rate has been low for long, despite the wage growth in many countries, giving ground to the so called “wage – price puzzle”, and questioning the traditional Phillips curve concept. Third, given the lingering monetary accommodation, policy space has narrowed, thus constraining the room for reaction if severe shocks occur. In this note, we will make an effort to transpose these challenges to the countries of the CESEE region and asses how relevant these global matters are for them.  Policy rates in advanced economies, in the US and the euro area in particular have remained low. The monetary policy normalisation was rolled-back in the US, with the new cycle of lowering the policy rate being opened. In the euro area, the accommodative stance of the ECB was strengthened, by further cutting the interest rates and relaunching the QE programme. These moves enabled for the already easy financing conditions to remain in place, and further easing to be expected as well.  This environment in the global context has been conducive for behaviour of yield searching, thus potentially encouraging excessive risk-taking and building up of financial vulnerabilities. Conditioned on the specifics of the region/country, financial vulnerabilities are assessed to be located in different sectors across different countries. According to the financial vulnerability map of the IMF published in the Global Financial Stability Report, October 2019 it seems that the risks stemming for sovereigns are still visible across the board. Similar inference can be made by observing assessed vulnerabilities in non-bank financial sector and nonfinancial corporates, while the picture on households and banks is rather mixed.       
3  Chart 1: Financial vulnerabilities – heat map across sectors and group of countries  Source: Global financial stability report, IMF 2019.  Low interest rates affect the cost for debt-service, thus being conducive for additional leverage in certain segments of the global economy. On the global map, sovereign debt levels remained elevated in some countries, euro area inclusive. As for the private sector debt, data do reveal that in some countries which were more resilient at the beginning, and entered the crisis with lower debt levels, vulnerabilities started to accumulate afterwards. This holds for the household debt, in particular, that proceeded to grow in some countries, raising concerns on the possible financial stability risks (Sweden, Norway, and Switzerland). Hence, it seems that in the global context, leverage issues seems to be on board, exposing some of the countries to risks in case of sudden tightening of financial conditions. In this case, debt level matters, as high levels can exacerbate the impact on growth and stability.  How do countries from the CESEE region fit in the image?  To answer the question we will dissect the debt data by providing perspective on both sovereign and private sector. In the matter of the sovereign debt, few years ago, it was diagnosed as one of the most vulnerable segments in the economies of the region. In most of the countries, the fiscal response to the crisis was countercyclical, asking for additional borrowing of the government and leading to sharp rise in the government debt level. The cumulative increase in the debt level since the beginning of the global crisis in 2007 until 2015 was close to 25 p.p. of GDP. In some countries, such as Slovenia, Serbia, Montenegro and Croatia, the shift was markedly above the average, with debt levels reaching between 70%-83% of GDP. After 2015, the debt level started to adjust, with a cumulative contraction of around 6 p.p. of GDP, visible in almost all countries in the region. The adjustment was supported through the cyclical recovery of the economies in the region, as well as fiscal discretionary measures, which allowed for fiscal consolidation and precluded further debt accumulation. Though public debt sustainability and vulnerability is a much more complex issue rather than 
4  a simple comparison with a benchmark criterion, still even the latter can provide certain guideline on the issues.  Chart 2  *Region refers to all the countries in the sample from CEE, SEE and the Baltics. Source: World Economic Outlook, October 2019.  The comparison of the public debt levels with the Maastricht Criterion as a benchmark reveals shift towards less vulnerable zone in most of the countries.  In 2015, when the average government debt level reached its peak, it was below the accepted benchmark by close to 8 p.p. of GDP, while in 2019, the distance was widened to 14 p.p. and by 2024, it is expected to reach around 20 p.p. (according to the WEO, October 2019 forecast). This clearly indicates that in the last couple of years, despite the low interest rate environment, fiscal space in CESEE region was rebuilt thus reducing public sector exposure to sudden shifts in the sentiment at the global financial markets or reversal in the interest rate cycle. Still it has to be noted that the public debt level is still above the pre-crisis pone, and few of the countries, despite the adjustment, did not succeed in bringing the debt level below 60% of GDP (Albania, Croatia, Hungary, Montenegro, and Slovenia). Even more, in Montenegro the debt level has still been increasing, reaching above 80% of GDP in 2019, raising concerns related to sustainability issues.  Private leverage in the region has been rising since early 2000s, albeit mostly from lower levels compared to advanced economies. After reaching the peak at the onset of the global crisis, gradual deleveraging occurred, but debt level remained elevated in comparison to the pre-crisis in many countries. At the outset of the global crisis, the average private debt level reached around 96% of GDP (2009), doubling compared to 2000. The post-crisis adjustment was mostly visible in the Baltic countries, where half of the pre-crisis rise was reversed. In the CEE and SEE countries, the adjustment was lesser. According to the latest available data (2017), given the decoupling in the speed of the post-crisis adjustment, private debt level in the different sub-regions started to converge. The average private debt level in 2017 stood at around 82% of GDP, with Baltics hovering at around 90%, SEE at 84%, and in the CEE region, standing at 75% of GDP.  49.136.179.314.527.737.928.39.352.460.555.829.746.352.550.325.40.0010.0020.0030.0040.0050.0060.0070.0080.0090.00RegionCEESEEBalticsGeneral Government Debt as % of GDP2000200720152019-20.0-15.0-10.0-5.00.05.010.015.020.025.030.0RegionCEESEEBalticsGeneral Government Debt, change in p.p2015/20072019/20152024/2019
5  Chart 3. Total private debt (in % of GDP) Chart 4. Change in private debt to GDP ratios (in percentage points)   *Region refers to all the countries in the sample from CEE, SEE and the Baltics. Source: IMF Global debt database.   The crisis accentuated the risks of high private sector indebtedness as important source of macro-financial vulnerability. In the CESEE region, some of these risks came to the fore in their banking systems, in the form of significantly rising NPLs during the crisis, following the years of high credit growth. Many countries came under the pressure to adjust their debt levels in line with the economic fundamentals that resulted in deleveraging process by households and corporates. The larger was the leverage build up pre crisis, the larger was deleveraging in its aftermath, in general. This particularly holds for the Baltics where private debt downscaled by 42 p.p. of GDP in 2017 from the peak in 2009. In CESEE region, deleveraging was most evident in Hungary and Slovenia, followed by Bulgaria as the most heavily indebted country pre-crisis. Yet, not all higher-debt countries managed to reduce their debt levels. Croatia, whose debt level rose substantially prior to the crisis, has only marginally deleveraged afterwards. There were also countries like Slovakia, North Macedonia, Poland and the Czech Republic, where the debt continued to rise further, yet, mostly from lower levels in the peak of the crisis.    40.060.080.0100.0120.0140.020022004200620082010201220142016CEESEEBalticsRegion
6   Chart 5. Change in private debt to GDP ratios, 2009-2017 (in percentage points) Chart 6. Private debt structure, 2017 (in percent of GDP)   *Region refers to all the countries in the sample from CEE, SEE and the Baltics. Source: IMF Global debt database.   Cross-sector analysis reveals that the pre-crisis increase in private leverage was almost equally driven by corporate and household sector, as the context was conducive for rising debt across the board. Corporate debt on average rose by 25 p.p. of GDP in 2009 compared to 2000, but marked cross – country differences were visible. In some countries, such as Bulgaria, Croatia, Baltics, Slovenia corporate debt level was rapidly increasing, bringing the debt level very close to 100% of GDP.   The higher the debt level, the more difficult the adjustment was, particularly given the soft post –crisis economic recovery and hence the low capacity to reduce the debt burden. In fact, only Slovenia and the Baltic states managed to deleverage markedly, while in Bulgaria, the adjustment was slower and the debt level remained relatively high. In some countries such as Slovakia, North Macedonia, Poland and the Czech Republic, the corporate sector continued to accumulate leverage post-crisis. In the case of North Macedonia, the rise in corporate debt was predominantly driven by external borrowing, mirroring the expansion of foreign companies established in the Technological Industrial Development Zones (TIDZ) that mostly rely on external funding through inter-company loans from their parent entities. Corporate debt continues to account for majority of total private debt in most CESEE countries (close to 70% of total private debt on average). Loose financing conditions contribute to mitigating the risks to corporate debt sustainability.     
7   Chart 7. Bank credit to households and non-financial corporations (y-o-y change, in percent)    Chart 8. Bank credit to households  (structure, in percent, 2010-2018 average)                                                            (y-o-y growth, in percent, 2010-2018 average)   Source: central banks websites.   Household debt increased from a very low base in almost all countries in the region, as supply and demand factors kept this segment underserved. Given the pre-crisis context, marked with rising capital inflows, falling interest rates and strong confidence, household debt started to increase. By the beginning of the crisis, it reached around 30% of GDP, with very strong growth observed in the Baltics (reaching close to 50% of GDP).  As the crisis occurred, the household debt adjusted as well, but the adjustment was mild, declining by only 5 p.p. of GDP after the crisis.  It even continued to increase in some countries - Slovakia, the Czech Republic, Poland and North Macedonia – facilitated by loose financial conditions with the overall perception for this segment being more diversified, with less of a risk and higher quality profile of the overall portfolio. Bank credit extended to households generally grew faster than corporate credit in most CESEE countries post-crisis. Broken down by purpose, there is a growth in housing loans, but 
8  consumer loans have also expanded extensively in most of the CESEE countries. Strong growth in consumer credit warrants close vigilance by authorities, given the risks associated to consumer credit as typically unsecured loans with shorter maturity that increases the exposure to credit risk. Some countries implemented macro-prudential measures to curb consumer credit growth and mitigate potential risks from fast rising households’ credit to financial stability. These measures included tightening of debt service to income ratio (the Czech Republic, Hungary, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia) and/or loan to value ratio rule for housing loans (the Czech Republic, Poland, Romania, Slovenia), limits to the maximum maturity of consumer loans (Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia) and more stringent risk weights on households loans (Poland, Slovenia, North Macedonia). Chart 9. Share of households with a DSTI above 40% (% of all indebted households and 90% confidence interval)  Source: Aleksandra Riedi “Household debt in CESEE economies: a joint look at macro- and micro-level data”, Focus on European Economic Integration, 2019, issue Q1/19     Recent OeNB study3 focusing on household debt in CESEE economies suggests that risks associated to households’ leverage have moderated post-crisis, but need monitoring in order to timely address potential vulnerabilities. The inference is based not purely on the level and dynamics, but some structural features as well, such as the currency and interest rate structure. Yet, estimated debt service to income ratio (DSTI)4 for all households in all CESEE countries is below 40%, as commonly used threshold in the literature for potential vulnerabilities related to household debt burden. Debt service burden is lowest in Hungary and the Czech Republic, while Romania and Albania stand out as                                                            3 Aleksandra Riedi “Household debt in CESEE economies: a joint look at macro- and micro-level data”, Focus on European Economic \Integration, 2019, issue Q1/19. The analysis uses macro-level data and data from the OeNB Euro Survey conducted in fall 2017. The indicators we analyze here are based on data from the OeNB Euro Survey.  4 DSTI estimates (from Aleksandra Riedi “Household debt in CESEE economies: a joint look at macro- and micro-level data”, Focus on European Economic Integration, 2019, issue Q1/19) are based on the OeNB Euro Survey wave conducted in fall 2017, where respondents were asked to report the amount spent per month to service all loans held by household members (including interest and principal payments). Author relates these payments to the household’s monthly net income also reported by the respondent to calculate the ratio. 
9  countries with the highest DSTI. This particularly holds for lower income households as more vulnerable group of households. Romania has the highest share of vulnerable households (with DSTI above 40%) and potentially vulnerable households with low income and low educational attainment.  In response to these developments, the National Bank of Romania undertook macro-prudential measures by setting up a cap on indebtedness at 40 percent of net income for leu-denominated loans and 20 percent for foreign currency-denominated loans starting January 2019. Measures are intended to address vulnerabilities associated with highly indebted borrowers and sustain financial stability in the country.  Chart 10. GDP per capita and private debt, 2017 Chart 11. Financial development and private debt, 2017   Source: IMF Global debt database, IMF WEO database and IMF Financial development index database.    
10   Following the post-crisis adjustment, private sector debt to GDP ratio stands very heterogeneous across CESEE countries ranging from about 28% of GDP to 129% of GDP in 2017. In most CESEE countries, debt levels are below the European average which corresponds to the level of economic and financial development. Private sector debt ratios in most of the countries are below the threshold in the Macroeconomic Imbalance Procedure (133% of GDP for total private debt) and MIP based reference values for households and non-financial corporate debt. Favorable financing conditions and solid economic growth recently have alleviated debt sustainability concerns in the region. Yet, there are important differences across countries. In Albania, Romania and the Czech Republic, debt levels are well below MIP based vulnerability benchmarks with private debt having stabilized or decreasing in recent years. In other countries, such as Slovakia, North Macedonia and to some extent Poland, private debt remains moderate by international standards, but is growing post-crisis urging for close vigilance by authorities. There are also countries such as Bulgaria and Croatia where private sector is still highly leveraged and therefore is source of concern for macro-financial stability. European Commission5 notes high corporate debt in Bulgaria as potential drag on investment and growth over the medium term. Deficiencies in the insolvency framework are identified as important factor that slows down the reduction in private sector debt and the workout of nonperforming loans in the country. In its latest report on Croatia6, the Commission has released the assessment showing that both household and corporate debt are within prudential levels, though still above the levels suggested by the economic fundamentals. The risks are moderating, but remain relevant mainly related to high concentration of corporate debt, exposure to currency risk and potential solvency risk for companies due to the high debt burden relative to corporate financial assets and equity.                                                              5 European Commission Country Report Bulgaria 2019 Including an In-Depth Review on the prevention and correction of macroeconomic imbalances. 6 European Commission Country Report Croatia 2019 Including an In-Depth Review on the prevention and correction of macroeconomic imbalances.  
11  Chart 12. Private debt to GDP by countries   Source: IMF Global debt database.   Overall, private debt appears sustainable in most CESEE countries, though risks still remain. External environment remains challenging, making the region vulnerable to economic downturn, capital flows reversals and sharp tightening of financial conditions globally. In the event that monetary and financial conditions remain easy for too long, it may stimulate excessive risk-taking and build-up of financial stability risks. This calls for authorities in the region to maintain and further strengthen macro-prudential frameworks, if needed, to reduce vulnerabilities and enhance resilience to shocks.     
12  *** The second issue that we tackle in this note is the phenomenon of “missing inflation” and the “wage–price puzzle”. The issue became relevant in the last couple of years, in the euro area in particular, where despite the recovery and positive shifts on the labour market, inflation rate remains subdued and below the inflation target. Since 2014, notable improvements on the labour market have been observed, with employment growing on average at a rate of 1.3% in the last five years, compared to the average decline of around 0.5% in the 2009-2014 period. Unemployment rate has been declining steadily, reaching 7.7% in 2019, close to the pre-crisis rate minimum. As the economy gained momentum, the negative output gap began to close, and in the last two years, it has been estimated to be mildly positive. Despite the adjustment of the economy in general, and the labour market in particular, the inflation remained rather soft. In the last three years, the headline inflation rate has averaged 1.5%, thus undershooting the inflation target constantly. At the initial stage, it was related to the subdued wage growth (around 1.3% for the period 2013-16), but with wages beginning to grow at faster pace, the debate was opened and the so called “wage–price puzzle” was brought to the fore.   Chart 13: Euro area inflation, output gap and employment growth in % Chart 14: Euro area headline inflation and core inflation (in percent)   Source: IMF WEO Database, October 2019. Source: Eurostat.  -2.50-2.00-1.50-1.00-0.500.000.501.001.502.002.503.00Output gap, as % of potentialInflation, average consumerpricesEmployment, y/y growth2000-20082009-20142015-20190.00.51.01.52.02.5Inflation, average consumerprices (change in %)Core inflation, average (changein %)2002-20082009-20142015-2019
13  The debate focused on several important issues related to the labour-costs pass-through, whether it has weakened in intensity in recent years and reasons behind these potential changes. In general, the findings reveal that the impact of wages on inflation might be less pronounced than in the past and relates to three important cyclical and structural factors. The first one relates to more subdued inflation and inflation expectations. The second one relates to the corporate profit margins that tend to be pro-cyclical, with their capacity for absorbing the rise in labour cost changing across the cycle. The third one is a factor of a more structural nature, linked to the rising competitive pressures and overall rising globalization. The results from a study of the IMF (REO – Europe, November 2019) on a sample of EA 15+3 and the NMSs reveals “that all these factors suggest that it is unlikely that the recent increase in wage growth will meaningfully spur inflation in the near term”. These findings support the need for monetary policy in many European countries to remain accommodative for a longer period, but at the same time being vigilant as the “prolonged period of accommodative financial conditions may have created an environment conducive to greater risk taking”.   Inflation in the region has been above the average compared with the inflation in the euro area, reflecting the convergence process, the greater exposure to shocks in primary commodities prices, and country specific factors. Yet, the overall inflation dynamics mimics the one in the euro area, given the tight trade linkages.  The average headline inflation rate in the CESEE region in 2003 – 2012 period averaged around 4%, while the euro area inflation gravitated around 2%. In the last six years, a suppression of inflation rate was visible across the board, and in both regions (CESEE and euro area) it averaged around 1%. Some reversal to 2% is observed in the last two years, but it is debated how sustainable the pickup in prices is. Very similar is the pattern of the core inflation, which started decelerating in 2013, averaging around 1%, with converging dynamics in the CESEE and the euro area. The contribution of the core inflation and food and energy prices to the overall inflation rate in the countries of the CESEE region in the last six years on average is generally balanced, with core inflation weighing slightly more. In the euro area, 76% of the average inflation dynamics was driven by the core inflation, and the rest by the more volatile prices. Compared to the 2002-2012 period, on average, in the last couple of years, the importance of core inflation for the dynamics of the headline inflation is much more pronounced, both in the region and the euro area. It either indicates that demand pressures and cost-push factors are becoming more prevalent, or that the pressures from the global commodities prices are becoming lesser.   
14   Chart 15: CESEE and euro area headline inflation and core inflation developments Chart 16: Contribution of core inflation and food and energy component to headline inflation in CESEE and Euro area (in p.p.)   Source: IMF WEO Database, Eurostat and National Statistics. Source: Eurostat and National Statistics.  The contribution of the monetary policy relevant inflation rate – core inflation to the overall inflation in the countries in the region has gained weight in the last couple of years. Still, the overall dynamics of the core inflation remains soft, with average growth at around 1%, very close to the growth in the euro area. Given the fundamental relation between the demand and the dynamics of the core inflation, the first area to be scrutinized is the dynamics of the output gap, which can provide for information on the cyclical position of the economy. The pre–crisis data reveal strong positive output gap, which in 2005-2008 averaged around 5% of the potential GDP. The economies in the region went under strong economic adjustment, as the crisis emerged and their growth was undershooting the potential, leading to negative output gap for much of the post–crisis period except for the past three years. Apparently, despite the post-crisis economic recovery, the momentum gained was not strong enough to lift the output gap away from the negative territory. In the last two-three years, turning point in the cycle can be noticed, though its strength and length is not strong enough to create pressures on the core inflation.     -1.00.01.02.03.04.05.06.07.08.0200220032004200520062007200820092010201120122013201420152016201720182019CESEE inflation, %CESEE core inflation, %Euro area inflation, %Euro area core inflation, %0.01.02.03.04.05.06.02002-20082009-20142015-20192002-20082009-20142015-2019Euro AreaCESEECore inflation, average (contribution to inflation, in p.p.)Food and energy prices, average (contribution to inflation, in p.p.)Inflation, average consumer prices (change in %)
15  Chart 17: Output gap in CESEE region and Euro area (percent of potential GDP)  Source: Authors’ calculation for most of the CESEE countries and IMF WEO Database for Euro Area.  The other important concept, which can be linked to prices are the wages, unit labour costs in particular.  “Although labour costs only account for some 20% of the cost structure of manufacturing firms, and for 40% in the case of firms in the services sector, these figures rise to almost 90% excluding inputs. Accordingly, when value added deflators, which exclude the cost of inputs, are analysed at aggregate level, changes in unit labour costs (that is, employee compensation corrected for productivity gains) are understood to be a fundamental determinant of future changes in prices” (Bank of Spain, Economic Bulletin, 2/2019).   After the drop in the midstream of the crisis, unit labour costs in the region started to rise moderately until 2017-2018 when sharp rise was noticed, supported by the cyclical upturn, as well as the rise of wages in public sector and minimum wages in some of the countries.  During 2011-2016, the overall growth of ULCs in the region averaged around 2%, while in 2017 and 2018 the y/y growth picked up to 5% - very close to the pre-crisis average growth. The sharp rise of the productivity adjusted wages should translate into higher core inflation. Yet, it only supported the disposable income and the rise in private consumption, while price pressures remained subdued. This disconnect between unit labour cost and inflation might indicate probable time lag between the two. Or “there might have been structural changes to the way firms incorporate costs into their pricing decisions that has affected the relationship between wage growth and inflation. If firms and workers expect low inflation going forward, for example due to the improved credibility of the central bank, firms may be reluctant to raise their prices even when faced with higher wage costs as they expect increases in costs to be only temporary. In such a situation, the pass-through of higher wages to prices would be muted due to lower expected persistence of cost and price changes. Alternatively, the rise in competition, either domestically or -4.0-2.00.02.04.06.08.010.0200220032004200520062007200820092010201120122013201420152016201720182019CESEEEuro Area
16  from abroad, may have limited the ability of firms to pass cost increases to consumers for fear of losing market share. Another important consideration of a more cyclical nature is firms’ profitability, which determines how much and how fast wage growth feeds into prices. To the extent that firms have buffers - comfortable profit margins - they may be able to absorb higher wage costs without increasing prices” (IMF, REO - Europe, November 2019).   Chart 18: CESEE and Euro area unit labor cost (change in percent) Chart 19: CESEE and Euro area labor productivity per person employed (change in percent)   Source: Eurostat, SEE Jobs Gateway Database, National Statistics and Authors’ calculation. Source: Eurostat and The Conference Board Total Economy Database™ (Original version), April 2019.  In this note, we will shed some light on the third issue, related to corporate profit margins. As discussed before, we will approximate the change in the profit margin as a difference between the GDP deflator and the change in the unit labor costs. Profit margins are thought to be pro-cyclical, with rising buffers during expansion, and their depletion during downturn, though this cannot be fully confirmed with the data that we have. What can be observed through the data is continuous downsizing of profit mark-ups in the region since 2012, on average at around 1.3%. Apparently, the profitability position of the corporates was comfortable enough to allow for continuous compression across countries and time, thus absorbing the rise in ULCs without passing them through to prices. Despite the adjustment, according to the latest IMF Regional Economic Outlook for Europe, November 2019 the level of the corporate profitability for part of the region that we scrutinize, the NMSs in the EU, is assessed as comfortable at the current juncture.  It seems that after-crisis, pass-through from the rising wages to inflation weakened. The IMF study in the REO, November 2019 reveals that inflation expectations, rising competition and profitability buffers can explain the broken link in the euro area and NMSs of the EU. According to our estimates, profitability buffers seem to play role in the region as a whole. This gives more comfort for the central bank -6.0-4.0-2.00.02.04.06.08.010.012.014.020022003200420052006200720082009201020112012201320142015201620172018CESEEEuro area-3.0-2.0-1.00.01.02.03.04.05.06.07.020022003200420052006200720082009201020112012201320142015201620172018CESEEEuro area
17  in pursuing an accommodative monetary policy. Yet, cautiousness is needed, as once the profitability breakeven is crossed, prices can respond stronger to the overall cycle and wage pressures. Hence, central banks have to be cautious in accommodating, as not always this is warranted by low inflation. Low prices might be a reflection of a more structural features (competition for instance), or cyclical ones (such as profitability). In the first case, the impact of the central bank is constrained, while in the second case – once the impact of the profitability cushion wanes – the monetary accommodation can add to stronger inflation pressures than acceptable. Chart 20: CESEE GDP deflator, unit labor costs and mark-ups (percent change)  Source: Eurostat, SEE Jobs Gateway Database, National Statistics and Authors’ calculation.    Conclusion   In the last couple of years we have dealt with the issue of the impact of the monetary policy normalisation, of the ECB in particular, on the region. At the current stance, not only that normalisation is distant, but rather stronger accommodative approach is being employed. The prolonged monetary expansion has called for greater vigilance in the context of excessive risk –taking and debt build-up. At the same time, more scrutiny has been put on the causes of the low inflation that might possible disclose a need for cautiousness in providing monetary stimulus. We have tried to transpose these challenges to the countries in the region, as in some of them economic boundaries for the monetary policy are lesser compared to the ECB, given positive policy rates. Our simple analysis shows that financial vulnerabilities, observed through the leverage of the public and private sector, seem to be contained, despite the loose financial conditions. Sovereign -10.0-5.00.05.010.015.02006200720082009201020112012201320142015201620172018Mark-up, change in %Unit labour cost, change in %GDP deflartor, change in %
18  debt has decreased in the last couple of years, indicating that countries use the benign financial conditions for creating more fiscal space. Private leverage is well below some of the accepted benchmarks. Yet in many of the countries, given the low interest rate environment, household credits are on a rising path, and potential risks are addressed through macro-prudential measures. Hence, some vigilance is needed, with respect to build-up of financial vulnerabilities, though they seem to be much lesser in the region compared to the more advanced economies. Inflation dynamics and its drivers seem to resemble those in the euro area, asking for more profound scrutiny of prices, before proceeding with monetary loosening.  At the current juncture, it seems that despite the monetary policy space which exists in part of the region, further policy cuts should be carefully calibrated and considered in the context of country specific assessment of future financial and inflation risks.  References: 1. Aleksandra Riedi “Household debt in CESEE economies: a joint look at macro- and micro-level data”, Focus on European Economic Integration, 2019, issue Q1/19.  2. Bank of Spain. 2019. “Recent developments in euro area labor costs and mark-ups” Box 4 of the Economic Bulletin 2/2019. 3. European Commission Country Report Bulgaria 2019 Including an In-Depth Review on the prevention and correction of macroeconomic imbalances. 4. European Commission Country Report Croatia 2019 Including an In-Depth Review on the prevention and correction of macroeconomic imbalances. 5. Financial Stability Reports of CESEE and Baltics countries.  6. IMF Global Financial Stability Report, several editions. 7. International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2019. “Wage Growth and Inflation in Europe: A Puzzle?” Chapter 2 of the Regional Economic Outlook - Europe, Washington, DC, November. 8. Private sector indebtedness and deleveraging in euro area countries, ECB Economic Bulletin issue 4/2017 - Boxes. 9. Recent developments in the indebtedness of the private non-financial sector in selected euro area countries, Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, January 2017.        
Benjamin E Diokno: A strong nation amid a slowing and volatileworldSpeech by Mr Benjamin E Diokno, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the centralbank of the Philippines), at the General Membership Meeting and Economic Briefing, Taguig, 6February 2020.*   *   *Officers and members of the Management Association of the Philippines (MAP) led by itsPresident, Atty. Francisco Ed Lim, ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon.For today, I chose the theme, “A Strong Nation Amid A Slowing and Volatile World,” whichencapsulates the BSP’s insights on the country’s economic performance in 2019 and the outlookfor 2020 and beyond. Let us have a quick overview of the global economy in 2019 and how major global economicmovers – US, the Euro area, Japan and China – are expected to perform in 2020.The International Monetary Fund’s (IMF) January 2020 World Economic Outlook (WEO) Updateprojects the global economy to post a modest 2.9 percent growth in 2019, before picking up byanother modest 3.3 percent in 2020. These numbers both represent a downward revision relativeto the October 2019 WEO projections.Global economic activity in 2019 was heavily weighed down by protracted trade policyuncertainty, geopolitical tensions, and idiosyncratic stress in key emerging market economies.While some green shoots were seen in the fourth quarter, facilitated by the broad-based shiftearlier in the year toward accommodative monetary policy and fiscal easing in some countries(e.g., China and the United States), business sentiment remained generally pessimistic.Over the near and medium term, the IMF sees downside risks, including rising geopoliticaltensions, intensifying social unrest; and further worsening relations between the US and itstrading partners.The recent growing concern over the Wuhan coronavirus outbreak has likewise weighed downon growth prospects not only in China, but in the entire world.On the domestic front, latest surveillance reports from multilateral agencies such as the IMF, theWorld Bank (WB), and the Asian Development Bank (ADB) continue to expect the Philippineeconomy to remain one of the fastest-growing economies in 2020—not only in the region, but inthe world as well. They expect the Philippines to grow between 6.1 percent to 6.2 percent duringthe year. In fact, some market analysts expressed higher growth prospects for the Philippines for 2020.Shortly after the release of the fourth quarter (Q4) 2019 GDP number last January 23, MorganStanley, Barclays, HSBC, PNB, and Nomura also released their 2020 growth projections for thePhilippine economy, which ranged from 6.0 percent to 6.7 percent.What are the key factors supporting this optimism?First, the Philippine economy continues to be resilient and sustainableSome key economic indicators in 2019 show that the country’s macroeconomic robustfundamentals remained intact. This is evident in the better-than-expected real GDP growth of 6.4percent it posted in Q4 2019, supported by accelerated government spending. This indicates that 1 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
the economy has fully regained its momentum and is now back on track with its medium-termgrowth targets. The 2019 GDP outturn was close to the lower end of the government’s growth target range of 6.0percent – 6.5 percent in 2019. Overall, the domestic economy in 2019 continued to be a picture of stability and resiliencecharacterized by:•    Sustained growth momentum;•    Favorable inflation environment;•    Ample liquidity and credit;•    Robust external position;•    Sound and stable banking system; and•    Modest fiscal deficit.Let me expound on these.GDP growth bounced strongly during the fourth quarter, which compensated for the weakexpansion registered during the first half of the year. The Q4 2019 GDP outturn of 6.4 percentwas driven largely by the ramping up of government spending (18.7 percent), alongsidesustained robust household consumption (5.6 percent). Accelerated government spending wasevident as public construction rose sharply by 33.8 percent in the fourth quarter of 2019. On the supply side, growth was propped by the 7.9 % growth in the services sector on the backof solid expansion in public administration and defense, financial intermediation, trade, and otherservices. The industry sector also contributed positively to the Q4 2019 output growth.Second, inflation environment has been generally low and stable.A key factor to the domestic demand in 2019 was the favorable inflation environment in thecountry, supported by well-calibrated monetary policy actions. Inflation in 2019 settled at average year-on-year headline inflation of 2.5 percent supported mainlyby the decelerating food inflation. This was lower than the 2018 inflation average of 5.2 percentamid.The 2019 inflation number was well within the BSP’s 2-4 percent target range for the year.Looking ahead, the latest baseline forecasts indicate that inflation is projected to average at 2.9percent for both 2020 and 2021.The balance of risks to future inflation appears to be weighted toward the upside for 2020, butremains tilted to the downside for 2021. Petitions for electricity rates and transport fareadjustments, the proposed increase in excise taxes on alcoholic beverages, and the impact ofAfrican Swine Fever (ASF) on meat prices are seen as the main upside risks to inflation.Meanwhile, slower global economic growth due to the escalation of protectionist policies inadvanced economies as well as geopolitical tensions, and the corona virus outbreak are themain downside risks to inflation.Equally important, inflation expectations – based on forecast surveys of private sector analysts –have remained manageable and well within the government’s target range. Results of the BSP’s 2 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
survey of private sector economists for December 2019 showed inflation will continue to remainon a target-consistent path for 2020 and 2021.Third, the credit-liquidity dynamics in the country remain supportive of long termsustained growth.Economic activities in the country has led to increased demand for loans across key economicsectors as reflected in the continued expansion of bank lending.Bank lending also continues to flow into the country’s production sectors, including real estate. Preliminary data show that outstanding loans of universal and commercial banks, net of reverserepurchase (RRP) placements with the BSP, grew by 10.9 percent in December, faster than the10.1-percent expansion in November.Nevertheless, loan demand remains healthy across sectors as shown in the table on the right.This is also consistent with the preliminary results of the senior loan officers survey conductedquarterly by the BSP, which showed stable overall demand for loans from both enterprises andhouseholds.Fourth, the Philippine banking system, as the lifeline of economic activity, remainsvibrant, sound, and compliant with domestic and international standards.This is because of BSP’s continuing financial reform agenda in the areas of banking supervision,financial inclusion, cyber security and technology, risk management, anti-money laundering,counter-terrorist financing, and capital market development. The series of RR cuts implemented in 2019, in addition to the BSP’s support for lendingactivities, are in line with our broad financial sector reform agenda to promote a more efficientfinancial system by lowering financial intermediation costs.Fifth, another key contributor to the 2019 growth performance was the improvingexternal sector position of the country amid narrower trade deficit.The external sector remains a pillar of strength for the economy given the recorded surpluses inthe balance of payments (BOP), along with a lower current account deficit in the first threequarters of 2019.The BOP position made a turnaround—from a deficit of US$ 2.3 billion in 2018, to a surplus ofUS$7.84 billion in 2019. The reversal was due to higher net receipts of trade in services, personalremittance inflows from overseas Filipinos, and sustained net inflows of foreign directinvestments and portfolio investments.At the same time, the current account deficit for the first nine months of 2019 shows narrowerdeficit of US$992 million from US$5.8 billion in the same period in 2018.This was largely a result of the lower trade in goods deficit, combined with higher net receipts inthe trade in services, and in the primary and secondary income accounts.Sixth, the current account deficit is manageable and financeable.A current account deficit is not necessarily a negative for the economy. An economy growing atan average of 6.5 percent annually in the past eight years, like the Philippines, needs to importcapital goods and services to expand its absorptive capacity and avoid overheating of theeconomy.As the government commits to accelerate infrastructure-focused investments, the increased 3 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
importation of capital goods, raw materials, and intermediate goods follow.Also, the country’s current account deficit is manageable and financeable given the sustainedstructural sources of foreign exchange inflows in the economy.These include overseas Filipino remittances, BPO revenues and tourist receipts, as well as netinflows of both foreign direct investments (FDIs) and foreign portfolio investments (FPIs).As of end 2019, the country’s gross international reserves (GIR) reached US$87.9 billion—equivalent to 7.7 months’ worth of imports of goods and services and payments of primaryincome. This is more than twice the traditional metric used to determine reserves adequacy, thatis, equivalent of 3 months worth of imports.The sustained favorable external debt profile, demonstrated by the continued easing of thecountry’s external debt to GDP ratio, supports the external sector position. The country’s external debt metrics continue to ease significantly with external debt-to-GDP ratiosettling at 23.7 percent as of end-September 2019 compared to about 60.0 percent in mid-2000s.A large part of the country’s external debt remains in medium-to-long term maturity profilesupporting a manageable debt repayment schedule over the medium-to-long term horizon.In addition, majority of the foreign borrowings are also fixed interest rate bearing, which makes itunaffected by any future foreign exchange fluctuations.Seventh, the national government has ample fiscal policy space to support acceleratedpublic investments. The improving fiscal position of the government, supported by the series of fiscal reforms andimproved tax administration, provides the government the resources to increase publicinvestments. More importantly, the push for infrastructure development is exactly what the economy needs toexpand its productive capacity.The Philippine government’s infrastructure agenda is focused on both hard and softinfrastructure. Pursuing hard infrastructure projects is meant to address decades of neglect,while investments on soft infrastructure ensures that we are able to capitalize on the potentialdemographic dividends arising from having a young population. Lastly, while I am certain that most of you are aware of the Philippine economy’s growthachievements in recent years, I think many are unaware that the Philippine economicgrowth story is actually decades in the making. At the core of this narrative is the pursuit of wide-ranging, and at times painful, purposeful policyreforms that have enabled the economy to be nimble, more productive, and more resilient.The BSP is also pursuing its own reform agenda. The new BSP Charter or Republic Act 11211embodies a package of reforms that will further align its operations with global best practices,improve the BSP’s corporate viability, and enhance its capacity for crafting proactive policiesamid rising interlinkages in the financial markets and the broader economy.The real essence of nation-building is when the private and public sector build on each other’sproductivity. The MAP promotes management excellence while the BSP pursues governanceexcellence—all in the name of nation-building. 4 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
While we emphasize that the strength of the country’s macroeconomic fundamentals and theimplementation of the Philippine government proactive measures to maintain our soundfundamentals, we also recognize that there are risks and challenges to both growth and inflationoutlook that need to be managed.On the domestic front, addressing infrastructure bottlenecks and enhancing disaster resilienceamid increased intensity and frequency of natural hazards are among the key challengesconfronting the economy.On the external front, major risks include a synchronized economic slowdown; rising geopoliticaltensions; higher tariff barriers between the US and its trading partners, and the recent novelcoronavirus outbreak which has now been assigned a “high-impact” global risk assessment bythe World Health Organization.Nonetheless, amid these risks and challenges, I am confident that the Philippine economy willremain as one of the bright spots in the region and we expect it to remain so with the support ofcritical structural reforms. After all, the positive growth story of the Philippines in the past 84 consecutive quarters was notachieved in a risk-free environment. The domestic economy’s proven ability to rise above thechallenges is reflective of the kind of growth it has built—rooted in structural transformation andnot in mere streak of luck.In conclusion, I believe that the Philippine economy remains in a position of strength to weatheruncertainties in the global environment. Sustained commitment to pursue the government’sinfrastructure program and reform agenda is key to achieving a high, inclusive and sustainablegrowth. An appropriate mix of monetary, fiscal, and other structural policies is crucial in achieving thegovernment’s short- and long-term macroeconomic objectives.At the end of the day, we both share one common goal—to help build a nation that promotes acomfortable, secure, and prosperous life, for all Filipinos—now and in the future.Rest assured that the BSP is one with the government and the private sector in this lofty goal. Asthe country’s central monetary authority, the BSP is committed to stay true to its mandates ofpromoting price and financial stability, and the attainment of a safe, and efficient payment andsettlement system conducive to a strong, sustainable, and inclusive growth of the economy.Thank you. 5 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
Benjamin E Diokno: Finding opportunities in a borderless worldSpeech by Mr Benjamin E Diokno, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the centralbank of the Philippines), at the 13th Annual FMAP Convention, El Nido, 28 February 2020.*   *   *To the officers and members of the Fund Management Association of the Philippines (FMAP) ledby President Noel Reyes and Convention Committee Chairperson Cristina Arceo,congratulations on your 13th annual convention.I am grateful to FMAP for inviting me to this event. This gives me an opportunity to address agroup whose general mission is not too far from what we at BSP pursue—to help uplift thepeople’s economic well-being through the professional and ethical practice of fund management.This year’s theme, “Anticipating Investor’s Needs in the New Decade Under a Borderless World”speaks of FMAP’s pursuit of advancing the field of fund management in this era ofinterconnectedness, while keeping investors’ needs and safety of paramount importance.Today, I will provide you some recent economic and financial market developments as well asthe BSP’s corresponding initiatives in promoting monetary and financial stability and an efficientpayment system. We hope that the FMAP, as an esteemed organization of fund managers, cantake advantage of the opportunities these developments offer as we all progress towards whatyou call a “borderless world.”As we embark on a new decade, let’s look at where we are now.Resilient economyAmid global uncertainties, the Philippine economy remains strong and in fact has beenexperiencing uninterrupted positive growth for more than two decades. Gross Domestic Product(GDP) posted a year-on-year growth of 6.4 percent in Q4 2019, resulting in the 5.9 percent full-year growth for 2019. The fourth quarter growth is primarily driven by the catch-up spending ofthe government and robust household consumption. On the production side, GDP growth wassupported by a resilient services sector. This underscores the Philippines’ place as one of themost resilient and fastest growing economies in the region.Positive forecasts for the domestic economy continue to remain firm over the medium term.Private consumption is expected to remain buoyant. Private capital formation is likewiseexpected to be robust while public construction will remain solid as the government’s BBBprogram accelerates. At the same time, we are closely monitoring the potential impact of aslowdown in global economic growth due to trade uncertainties, rising geopolitical tensions, theworsening climate-related disasters such as bushfires, typhoons, and flooding across the worldand the fast spreading coronavirus on domestic economic activity.Effective monetary policyIn 2019, inflation averaged 2.5%, a sharp drop from 5.2% average in 2018.The latest baseline forecasts indicate a broadly steady path of inflation for 2020 and 2021, withaverage inflation remaining within the target range of 3.0 percent ± 1 percentage point. Inflationexpectations also continue to be firmly anchored within the target over the policy horizon.Thus, a few weeks ago, the Monetary Board decided to cut the policy rate by another 25 basispoints. This is a preemptive reduction in the policy rate to support market confidence and todefend against the potential spillovers associated with the mentioned external factors. 1 / 6BIS central bankers' speeches
Strong external positionWe have hefty Gross international Reserves (GIR), US$86.9 billion as of end-January 2020. ThisGIR level represents an ample liquidity buffer equivalent to 7.6 months’ worth of imports of goodsand payments of services and primary income. It is also equivalent to 5.4 times the country’sshort-term external debt based on original maturity.Alongside the growing economy, the banking sector exhibits continued expansion and resilience.The Philippine banking system has grown steadily during the past 18 quarters, expanding itsassets to P18.3 trillion as of end-December 2019.Bank deposits were able to sustain growth and spur expansion in loans and investments. Bankdeposits registered a 7.1 percent growth in end-December 2019 to P13.7 trillion. Borrowings andbond issuances reached P1.5 trillion and served to complement funds generated from deposits.Despite the rapid expansion of credit, loan quality has remained satisfactory with non-performingloans at only 2.0 percent of the banking system’s total portfolio.The banking system also maintains an acceptable level of liquidity that can be readily utilizedduring periods of stress. Liquidity of universal and commercial banks (UKBs) and subsidiarybanks and quasi-banks remained ample as the liquidity coverage ratio as of end-September2019 stood at 171.2 percent on a solo basis and 169.0 percent on a consolidated basis.Banks likewise remain well-capitalized as the capital adequacy ratio (CAR) of universal andcommercial banks is well-above the 10 percent minimum thresholds set by the BSP and 8% setby the BIS. As of end-September 2019, the CAR of the UKBs slightly improved to 15.6 percentand 15.9 percent, on solo and consolidated bases, respectively.Growth of debt and equity marketsWhile the Philippine economy remains bank-centric at present, the growth path of the Philippinedebt and equity markets is promising.  Improvement has certainly been noted, as measured bythe level of financial assets to GDP. Over the last two years, the equity and debt markets havebeen growing.Over the past years, the Philippines has been one of the fastest growing local currency bondmarkets in emerging Asia. Outstanding debt securities stood at P6.6 trillion as of 2019, which is9.0 percent higher than 2018 data. While government issuances continue to represent the bulk ofoutstanding debt securities, corporate bond issuances have grown significantly, constantly risingby 14.5 percent from 2018 to 2019.Economic outlookThe country’s strong growth potential can also be seen in the favorable outlook of variousinstitutions, such as the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the World Bank (WB) and the AsianDevelopment Bank (ADB) as published in their latest surveillance reports. These third-partyassessments are broadly in line with official’s GDP growth target range of 6.5 percent to 7.5percent for 2020.Meanwhile, Goldman Sachs Emerging Market Outlook 2020 expects the Philippine economy togrow by 5.8 percent and 6.5 percent in 2019 and 2020, respectively. These are higher than theGDP growth forecasts for our neighboring countries.The “Road to A” AgendaIf we do the “right” things, in two years, we envision the country to obtain single “A” ratings which 2 / 6BIS central bankers' speeches
we expect to spur greater investments and faster economic growth. Recently, Japan-based R&Iassigned to the Philippines a “BBB+” rating, which is a notch away from the “A” level goal. Also,the recent adjustment in the outlook of Fitch Ratings from investment grade “stable” toinvestment grade “positive” is an encouraging development.Going Beyond BordersMeanwhile, the economic and financial landscape also continue to rapidly evolve. And if I mayrefer to your theme again, the changes in the financial landscape are breaking down borders ofdifferent types. They offer a breadth of opportunities that are too enormous to not be seen and feltand may, in fact, make us less relevant if we do not adapt. I will focus on two of them tonight. Regional integrationFirst are the developments within ASEAN. In the region, we continue to pursue cooperativeefforts. The ASEAN integration framework that is geared toward creating an ASEAN EconomicCommunity means that for financial markets, particularly for foreign exchange and securities,transactions are expected to be more fluid. Hence, capital markets, banking services, andpayments and settlement systems are expected to be harmonized by a common set ofconvention or standards. In a sense, this is breaking down geographic borders.Technological advancementsSecond are the developments in technology and infrastructure. As you well know, technologicalinnovation is the new frontier and can shape the future of finance and investment. The advent ofFintech is affecting the way financial institutions do business. It is reshaping the way investmentproducts are being distributed, how clients interface with the institutions, and how investmentadvice is dispensed. The use of technology is considered as a lynchpin in delivering financialservices with convenience especially to the unbanked and the underbanked. In this way, we havebeen able to break through barriers associated with traditional modes of transacting.The next few slides will cover what the BSP has done and what it plans to do to make sure thatthe gains are sustained and built upon in the future.The ASEAN integration framework – banking and collective investments schemesThe BSP demonstrated its commitment and support of financial integration through the passageof the amendment to Republic Act 7721 on the entry of foreign banks in the Philippines in 2013.Since then, we have had a major player in the ASEAN region establish a branch in the country.We have likewise continued to upgrade our banking, supervisory and regulatory framework with aview toward adopting international standards and best practices. We continue to evolve as afinancial supervisor and will be embarking on a major change in the framework this year throughthe adoption of the Supervisory Assessment Framework or “SAFr” (pronounced “safer”), whichenhances our existing ratings framework for BSP-supervised institutions.Perhaps one initiative that would be very relevant to the FMAP is the ASEAN CollectiveInvestment Schemes (CIS) framework. This envisions the cross-border offering of CIS that willbe beneficial to both investors and market players.  For investors, the ASEAN CIS will expandinvestment options and create opportunities for diversification. For market players, theFramework will provide an avenue to grow the business and provide the impetus to improveprocesses that will be at par with global standards.There are still challenges that we must hurdle in order to harness the opportunities of the ASEANCIS. There is a proposed CIS Bill that is currently under review by Congress. The Bill is intendedto level the playing field by providing a regulatory framework for all forms of collective investmentschemes through the elimination of existing differences in the regulatory treatment among 3 / 6BIS central bankers' speeches
different forms of CIS. The BSP recognizes the value of pursuing both of these objectives.Sustainable FinanceThe ASEAN is likewise committed to the promotion of green, social, and sustainable finance.Through the ASEAN Capital Markets Forum, ASEAN Standards on Green Bonds, Social Bonds,and Sustainability Bonds have been issued. The recent issuances of bonds in the Philippinesbearing the label of the ASEAN Green Bond Standards is a welcome development as the ASEANstrives towards greening the financial market. There is a huge demand for bonds that are eithergreen, social, or sustainable. Thus, the Working Committee on Capital Markets Development ofthe ASEAN, where BSP is a member, conducts roadshows that will foster coordination ofprospective issuers and investors.While the initiatives in the capital markets are led by SEC, the BSP fully supports the SEC aswell as works with other government agencies following a whole-of-government approach. Itsubscribes to the principle that financial regulation can be a useful tool to contribute to theachievement of national and international environmental objectives. The BSP has undertakencapacity building and awareness campaigns, and is due to issue a Circular on environmentaland social governance. Moreover, the BSP hopes to obtain the support of FMAP in consideringthis asset class in your investment portfolios.Other than direct support to sustainable finance initiatives, the BSP has also embarked onimportant complementary efforts that would encourage more participation in the capital markets—by issuers, investors, and intermediaries.Technology as EnablerWhile globalization brings countless opportunities, the immense power of technology canmagnify outcomes. In fact, the BSP has supported the use of digital solutions in pushing forwardfinancial inclusion.In this regard, the BSP has provided strong support for enabling infrastructure and standards forinterconnectivity.One of the most important perhaps is the National Retail Payment System (NRPS) framework,which aims to provide direction in carrying out retail payment activities in a safe and efficientmanner. The NRPS has been transformative. According to the Better than Cash Alliance studyreleased in December 2019, the estimated total monthly volume of digital transactions grew bymore than 20 times from 2013 to the end of 2018, with the increase driven by payments made byindividuals. The BSP is encouraged by these numbers and expects the percentage of paymentstransactions done digitally to reach 50 percent by 2023.You may also already know that the BSP has fully supported the passage of RA No. 11055,which established the foundation for the development of the Philippine Identification System orPhilSys. The adoption of verifiable and unique digital identities could pave the way for a broaderparticipation in the financial system, as it will be easier to open accounts and apply for financialservices.The BSP is mindful that the openness in the financial services industry and the ease of accessto products will not by itself lead to inclusiveness. The risks to the customers and investors andservice providers alike are higher if products and modes of delivery are not well understood.Forging trust in the financial services industry is necessary and these can be achieved bypromoting financial literacy and consumer protection. This is why the Bangko Sentral advocatesthese complementary initiatives.Educating Investors 4 / 6BIS central bankers' speeches
For two years now, the BSP has been organizing financial education expos. In the November2019 expo themes included responsible financial planning, becoming good financial role models,stock market investing, and mainstreaming financial education in school curriculums.The BSP has consciously targeted the younger population in order to inculcate early on, thevalue of saving and knowledge on money and finance. We have partnered with the Departmentof Education more than once and has supported private sector programs geared at developingtools for the delivery of important messages.As our economy continues to grow and such growth translates into higher incomes forconsumers, the challenge is to make sure the consumers imbibe the discipline of saving andthat they are armed with the proper information so that they can eventually migrate into retailinvestors.Consumer ProtectionNow I turn to our other advocacy, which is consumer protection. While the underpinning principleis very simple––not to take undue advantage of users of financial services––it has taken on manydimensions because of developments in products and service delivery.For instance, the use of technology has added another layer of risk to transactions withcustomers. A client could have issues on data privacy, security, or those relating to simpledowntimes in systems.The BSP has issued sets of regulations on consumer protection for its supervised institutions.More specific guidance appear in the in the sales and marketing guidelines for financial productsas well as the Basic Standards in the Administration of Trust, Other Fiduciary and InvestmentManagement Accounts. At the core of these standards is the expectation that financialinstitutions must know their clients and remain focused on what products and services yourinvestors really need.I know that as members of the FMAP, you continuously hold yourselves to a high standard. Youalready have the Asset Management Code in place. I am also encouraged by your theme thisyear – anticipating investors’ needs in a borderless world. This tells me that the industry is awarethat in order to move forward, the customer’s need must always be met. He or she must feelsafe to transact by any mode and he or she must be satisfied with the product or service availedof. In this, the BSP and the FMAP’s objectives are aligned.ConclusionTo recap, the current state of the economy provides many opportunities. The continued growthand positive outlook on the Philippines may mean that the financial industry will need to step up tomeet the demands of future savers and investors.The potential to meet financial inclusion objectives are likewise spurred by the elimination ofborders through regional integration and technological developments. Meanwhile, gains can onlybe sustained through education and a conscious effort to protect the welfare of consumers.I am reminded of a quote from US President John F. Kennedy:“Change is the law of life, and those who look only to the past or present are certain to miss thefuture.”Ladies and gentlemen, we are in the era where finance and provision of services to investors aretransformed from the conventional approach into a “borderless world.” We can only ablyembrace change if we prepare ourselves well. 5 / 6BIS central bankers' speeches
Thank you and good evening! 6 / 6BIS central bankers' speeches
INTERVIEWCapital markets union: the role of equity markets and sustainable financeContribution by Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the ECB, on the occasion of the publication of the ECB report on “Financial integration and structure in the euro area”, Frankfurt3 March 2020The release of the ECB report on “Financial integration and structure in the euro area” is an excellent opportunity to share some thoughts on the European capital markets union, or CMU project. Well-functioning and innovative capital markets are essential in enabling firms, households and governments to access stable funding and saving opportunities that are vital for consumption, investment and, ultimately, economic growth and employment.[1]One could even argue that the CMU is a common denominator across many – if not all – EU strategies and a pillar for strengthening the EU’s autonomy on the global stage. Without progress towards a fully-fledged CMU, we will face significant difficulties in effectively addressing the global challenges facing the EU. Further developing and integrating EU capital markets takes on even more urgency in light of the challenges posed by the United Kingdom’s departure from the EU. Last, but certainly not least, there are strong synergies between the completion of the CMU and the finalisation of banking union. Though the world of finance may sometimes seem distant or arcane, it is more important to people’s everyday lives than many might think. For one, badly functioning financial systems have the potential to harm all of us – as the experiences of 2008 and beyond have shown.I will start with a short update on the progress achieved so far, and then turn to the way forward, focusing on two key dimensions in developing deeper capital markets: risk capital markets and sustainable finance.Significant advances were made in the first phase of the CMU, but more can be achievedFollowing its launch in 2015, the CMU agenda led to some important accomplishments. Thanks to the efforts of the European Commission together with the Council and Parliament, 11 out of 13 proposals from the original action plan were successfully adopted across a number of important areas, including insolvency frameworks, covered bonds, securitisation markets and the development of a pan-European pension product. These policies are expected to have very positive effects on the development and integration of EU capital markets, even though initial ambitions had to be scaled back in some cases in order to reach agreement among the co-legislators. While it will take time for the full impact of these measures to unfold, we need to go further to unlock the potential of the Single Market – important building blocks are still missing. [2]Relaunching CMU should be a priority for the years ahead Recent developments have increased the urgency of bringing the CMU to the next level. First, the EU needs to address the consequences of the United Kingdom’s departure from the EU. Given uncertainties regarding regulatory divergence, we should not take it for granted that the EU and UK financial systems will retain their current degree of interconnectedness. As I have said before, a degree of decoupling is inevitable.[3]We therefore need to develop capital markets in areas where the EU financial system is now strongly reliant on the City of London and support the efficient interaction of EU financial hubs, as well as prevent regulatory arbitrage within the EU. 
Second, deeper, more efficient and innovative markets can help finance the fight against the climate emergency. Future actions on sustainable finance will be crucial, also in increasing public support in Europe for further policy measures. I will come back to this later. Third, relaunching the CMU agenda goes hand-in-hand with enhancing the international role of the euro, which has become more important in the present global context. Together with banking union, the CMU encourages the further development, integration and safety of products and markets that are essential for convincing global investors to hold more assets denominated in euro. Achieving a fully-fledged CMU will require progress across a wide range of issues. I would now like to elaborate on what I see as two key areas for completing the CMU: the dynamism of private equity markets, in particular for the financing of risk capital, and sustainable finance. CMU and private equity markets in EuropePrivate equity investment, particularly in risk capital markets, is a pressing area for improvement in the context of the CMU. By risk capital markets I mean private equity and venture capital markets that fund young innovative companies whose projects face higher uncertainty, but also have higher economic value in terms of technological growth. Deep private equity markets are associated with well-documented economic benefits. Similar to, but more forcefully than equity shares traded on stock markets, more private equity investment leads to higher rates of patented innovation.[4]It increases the rate of new business creation,[5] especially in countries that afford greater protection of intellectual property rights and levy lower taxes on capital gains.[6] Moreover, it strongly supports high-tech start-ups on their path to becoming industrial leaders.[7]In Europe, the development of risk capital markets is being held back by a number of factors and frictions on both the demand and the supply side. For example, cultural barriers to risk taking, such as the stigma of entrepreneurial failure, are rather high; there is a lack of easily available and harmonised information on firms; debt investment enjoys a tax advantage over equity investment; pension products and systems are generally averse to risk capital; and financial literacy[8]– as well as public investment in fundamental science and market-oriented research and development as a share of GDP[9] – is lower than in many peer economies.What can the CMU do to stimulate the development of risk capital markets in Europe? Reforms to this end include reducing the tax advantage of debt, increasing financial literacy, enhancing pension savings and incentivising adequate equity investment by pension funds, and reorienting EU private investment programmes towards more equity investment in high-tech firms and sectors. Some wider and more long-term public policy choices include significantly stepped up funding for life sciences and technology, as well as introducing product and labour market reforms. By improving the quality of the commercial projects that require funding, such policies will benefit the development of not only private, but also of public equity markets. The new bi-annual report “Financial integration and structure in the euro area” published today shows that the level of private equity in Europe is not low, unlike that of public equity listed on exchanges. In fact, financing through unlisted equity accounts for a larger share of overall financing in the euro area than in the United States or Japan.[10]However, European private equity markets are comparatively less dynamic in the sense that they fail to provide young and innovative firms with sufficient funding or adequate help in expanding. CMU and the sustainable finance agendaTo most people in Europe, the need for deep and liquid capital markets might not seem the most pressing issue. The latest survey data show that people are more concerned about other topics: climate change and digitalisation.[11]Nonetheless, I am convinced that the CMU has an important role to play here and its advancement should be seen in tandem with the EU’s efforts to support the transition to a carbon-neutral economy. The CMU and sustainable finance are two mutually reinforcing initiatives and we could benefit from considerable synergies by making progress on both fronts. On the one hand, the development of the CMU could support the EU’s drive towards a greener and more sustainable economy. By making it easier for investors to seek out sustainable investment opportunities across Europe, deep and liquid capital markets could help mobilise the funds needed to finance the transition to a low-carbon economy. It is not only the quantity and availability of private capital that matters for this transformation, but also its quality. ECB research shows, for instance, that equity finance seems to be more effective than debt finance in reallocating investment towards relatively greener sectors. Equity investors, who tend to have a longer investment horizon and a greater appetite for high-risk high-return projects might be better placed to finance environmentally sustainable innovation than banks.[12]
By supporting the development of equity financing, the CMU could facilitate the funding and adoption of carbon-efficient technologies. But the positive feedback between CMU and sustainable finance works both ways. To the extent that the ongoing EU policy initiatives are successful in removing the current obstacles to the development of a cross-border market for sustainable financial products, these actions could also be instrumental in advancing growth in this segment of the capital markets. This, in turn, could support financial integration in the EU and strengthen Europe’s role as a global hub for sustainable finance.[13]ConclusionDeveloping private equity markets and supporting efforts towards a greener economy are very much on the minds of decision-makers, and we welcome the work of the various groups and forums that contribute to these debates. In particular, we look forward to the recommendations of the High Level Forum on CMU set up by the Commission. We trust these will play an important role in shaping the Commission’s new set of CMU measures for the benefit of the European citizens. [1]Hartmann, P., Heider, F., Papaioannou, E. and Lo Duca, M. (2007), The role of financial markets and innovation in productivity and growth in Europe, Occasional Paper Series, No 72, ECB, September; Davis, J. (2015), Capital markets and job creation in the 21st century, Center for Effective Public Management at Brookings Paper, December.[2]See Rebranding Capital Markets Union – A market finance action plan, report by the CEPS-ECMI Task Force of June 2019.[3]See speech by Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the ECB, at the SUERF/De Nederlandsche Bank Conference “Forging a new future between the UK and the EU”, Amsterdam, 8 January 2020.[4]Kortum, S. and Lerner, J. (2000), “Assessing the contribution of venture capital to innovation”, RAND Journal of Economics, 31(4), pp. 674–692.[5]Samila, S. and Sorenson, O. (2011), “Venture capital, entrepreneurship, and economic growth”, Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(1), pp. 338–349.[6]Popov, A. and Roosenboom, P. (2013), “Venture capital and new business creation”, Journal of Banking & Finance, 37(12), pp. 4695–4710.[7]Popov, A. (2014), “Venture capital and industry structure: Evidence from local US markets”, Review of Finance, 18(3), pp. 1059–1096.[8]See Financial Literacy Around the World: Insights from the Standard & Poor’s ratings services global financial literacy survey.[9]See Eurostat R&D expenditure.[10]See Chart 1.2 in the key messages of ECB (2020), “Financial integration and structure in the euro area”, Frankfurt am Main.[11]de Vries, C. E. and Hoffmann, I. (2019), “Great expectations: The New European Commission, its Ambition and European Public Opinion”. eupinions 2019/2.[12]De Haas, R., and Popov, A. A. (2019), “Finance and carbon emissions”, Working paper series, No 2318, ECB, September.[13]The EU is already the largest international market for green bonds: EU entities account for around 46% of global issuance and around 42% of the global market is denominated in euro. Source: Dealogic data and ECB calculations.European Central BankDirectorate General Communications Sonnemannstrasse 20, 60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany Tel.: +49 69 1344 7455, E-mail: media@ecb.europa.euWebsite: www.ecb.europa.euReproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.Media contactsCopyright 2020, European Central Bank 
Denis Beau: What financial sovereignty in a digital world?Morning closing keynote speech by Mr Denis Beau, First Deputy Governor of the Bank of France,at the 8th Annual Meetings of France Payments Forum, Paris, 3 March 2020.*   *   *We now live in an increasingly digital world, in which technical progress makes it possible tomarket new goods and services that claim to simplify and enrich our lives. In the area of finance,like elsewhere, innovation seems to have followed a historical process rendering it practicallyinvisible: As St Exupéry writes in Wind, Sand and Stars “Thus, precisely because it is perfect themachine dissembles its own existence”. Behind this apparent simplification, however, lies aprofound change in financial activities, their ecosystem and their international integration. Thischange raises many challenges for our national and European sovereignty, which fundamentallymeans our ability to preserve and impose our collective choices in terms of stability, efficiencyand fairness of the financial system.As a central banker and supervisor, I serve an institution that has been mandated by thelegislator to help enforce these choices by ensuring the stability of the financial system,especially in the area of payment systems and means of payment, which is the subject of thisconference, as well as their security and smooth functioning. These escalating challenges to oursovereignty are therefore something I cannot ignore. I would thus like to share with you nowsome thoughts on the nature of these challenges and the contribution that central banks canmake to address them effectively.1.The digitisation of the economy and its challenges for sovereigntyA- The digitisation of the economy has led to a profound change in financial ecosystems. Thedevelopment of an Internet-based network economy has provided businesses with more directaccess to consumers, while reducing the fixed costs of launching and operating services Thischange has gone hand in hand with changing lifestyles and increased expectations in terms ofsimplicity, availability, immediacy and even personalisation of services. This is commonlyreferred to as the “customer experience". The emergence of digital banks, where interaction withthe customer is mainly carried out via a mobile application, is an example of a response to thisnew standard in terms of practices.Changing patterns in practices have also prompted some companies to position themselvesbetween customers and traditional service providers in very specific segments in order to offervalue-added services. This “re-intermediation” has given rise in Europe to a continuousadaptation of regulations in order to regulate and secure data sharing, which is the driving forcebehind open banking. This trend benefits both relatively small players (FinTechs) and technologygiants whose business model is based on the monetisation of data (Gafams and BATX, whoseentry into the European market is more recent).These changes are the natural result of a process of creative iteration, and promise to simplifypractices by diversifying them. Nevertheless, they have significant consequences for thestructure of markets, with a substantial impact on our ability to impose and control ourpublic policy choices regarding financial services, in particular in terms of legal,technological and operational certainty.  For instance,which law is applicable, when the provision of services involves players established indifferent jurisdictions with sometimes contradictory legal requirements? The United Statesin particular is characterised by a broad definition of extraterritoriality. Besides theidentification of the legal framework, there is also the question of the ability of a judicialauthority to enforce the law, given the size of financial groups, the large number of 1 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
intermediaries, or the location of their various activities. The digitisation of financial services also introduces a new form of dependence onphysical (mobile phones and connected objects) as well as digital (search engines, mobileapplications) entry points and on the non-European technology companies that control anddominate them. Yet, competition law, created in the 19th century in a period when theState took a stand on monopolies, is proving to be ill-equipped to deal with thesetechnology companies.Lastly, the dematerialisation of activities, by increasing the number of interconnections andsystem entry points, makes them more vulnerable to potential “cyber-attacks” and to theiruse for money laundering and terrorist financing purposes, and makes them moredependent, to counter this, on non-European players who also operate outside theregulated financial sectors.B- In the area of payments, digitisation is likely to have additional consequences, whichalso pose major challenges in terms of sovereignty. Here, I would like to highlight twothat deserve special attention:The first is the development of new types of settlement assets. The operation of ourpayment systems currently relies heavily on the largely complementary use of twotypes of settlement asset that can be exchanged at any time at par: central bankmoney, the only legal tender settlement asset, which is the money for the settlement oftransactions between financial intermediaries, and commercial bank money, which isgenerally preferred for the settlement of retail transactions. Some crypto-asset projectsaim to compete with – rather than supplement – this system by offering alternativesettlement assets, “coins", whose value is not necessarily linked and fixed to central bankor commercial bank money. The implementation of these projects has shown that it is noteasy to create the conditions for confidence in these alternative settlement assets andtheir use remains marginal to date. However, if their use were to grow significantly, theirimpact on the global economy could pose a major challenge to our current monetary orderwith major concerns for stability and sovereignty.The second consequence that deserves particular attention is the processing andstorage of payment data. Both the applicable law and the ability of private and publicplayers to ensure the proper management of their data depend on location of servers. Yeta growing share of data storage services is being outsourced to cloud providers, most ofwhich are foreign. In addition, the use of public cloud services, where data from multiplecustomers are aggregated on a single server, raises issues of data security andauditability.Several recent episodes such as the US sanctions in Crimea (2014) or the Amazon WebServices failure (2017) have illustrated the real risks to and impacts on the economy of adestabilisation of payment activities. They thus stressed the need for the community to maintainend-to-end control over an activity that is essential to industry, commerce and public services.2. Faced with these challenges, what roles should central banks play?In this perspective, the public authorities responsible for the development of the regulatoryframework applicable to financial services and European private players obviously have a majorrole to play. The future of Europe’s sovereignty over its payments system will be all themore secure if it can rely in particular on the ability of its private and industrial players,FinTechs and financial intermediaries to adapt and innovate continuously in order toreap the benefits for themselves and their customers of an open, competitive and highlyintegrated payments market at European and international level. 2 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
In the exercise of their supervisory mandate, central banks can contribute to this by reconcilingthe need for openness and support for innovation, which is inherent to an economy integratedinto world trade for the benefit of consumers, with their fundamental mission as guarantors andpromoters of sound risk management.But they can also contribute through their two other traditional channels, namely as a catalystand a provider of settlement services in central bank money.A- I believe that this catalyst role is important in the field of retail payments. Commercialbank money is the predominant settlement asset in France, even though the use of banknotesand coins remains significant in this country, as in most of the European Union. This variety ofmeans of payment, based on settlement assets that can be exchanged at any time at par, is anadvantage that I believe should be preserved for several reasons: on the one hand, because ofthe financial inclusion responsibility, since the most vulnerable populations are also the leastbanked; but also with a view to diversifying risks, in the event of a widespread failure of electronicpayment systems.However, it is commonly believed that in Europe there is a risk of a fragmentation ofcashless means of payment and a dependence on dominant foreign players that benefitfrom the effects of global networks. This is particularly true of international payment schemesin the area of card payments (Visa, Mastercard), through which nearly two-thirds of cardpayments made in the European Union, especially cross-border transactions, are routed.Eighteen countries depend entirely on international schemes for the processing of their domestictransactions. Mobile payments, whose share is increasing, depend largely on mobile operatingsystem developers such as Apple or Samsung. In addition, private systems entering in theinstant payment sector are multiplying – Paypal, Lydia, and also Alipay, which will soon belaunched in France, for example – at the risk of undermining bank interoperability andcompetition. Restrictions on the use of certain proprietary technical solutions such as NFCsensors, or payment card acceptance software for example, may also constitute an obstacle tofree competition.Hence, the importance, in this context, of including collective interest projects in the Europeanstrategy for retail payments, which has reiterated the need for the EU to ensure theindependence of its range of payment solutions. A key example of this is the project conductedby a group of banks to propose a solution, known as the European Payment Initiative (EPI).This is why the Banque de France and the Eurosystem as a whole are encouraging andsupporting this market initiative, which would represent a further major milestone in thecreation of an integrated European payment area since the creation of the SEPA area.B- Central banks may also contribute as providers of settlement services in central bankmoney, particularly with regard to financial intermediaries. Indeed, central bank money isthe cornerstone of settlements between financial intermediaries and has every reason to remainso in the future: experience shows that financial players need a risk-free settlement asset.However, with the development of the tokenisation of financial assets, would it beadvisable to tokenise their counterpart, the settlement currency? Doing this may lead tochanges not in what constitutes the very foundation of central bank money – confidence – but inthe way it is issued. It is in this context that the opportunity for a “wholesale” central bankdigital currency could arise. This requires central banks to invest in the technicalinnovations underpinning the digitisation of financial assets and their transfer methods,to conduct experiments and take advantage of them in order to improve theperformance of the services they provide to the economy. And that is what the Banque deFrance is doing. With the support of its Lab, it has been investing in blockchain technology forseveral years now, and is implementing it on an operational level with its MADRE project for 3 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
managing the databases for SEPA creditor identifiers and bank branches. Another recentexample is the ECB’s launch of the TARGET Instant Payment Settlement (TIPS), with the aim ofensuring the coordinated development of instant payments.  By placing its initiatives within theframework of the Eurosystem’s discussions on an “e-euro", the Banque de France will continueand enhance its investment and expertise in the area of innovation in payment infrastructuresand means of payment. To this end, it has recently created an Infrastructures, Innovation andPayments Directorate. This Directorate will enhance its resources in this area and will, I hope,participate in the work carried out within the BIS Innovation Hub. On an operational level, thiscommitment will soon lead the Bank, in close cooperation with market professionals, toconduct experiments with a view to integrating a CBDC into the procedures forexchanging tokenised assets. In this respect, a call for projects will be launched at theend of March 2020.ConclusionIt is indisputable that the digitisation of the economy has been a source of progress in the field ofpayments and other areas, as it has diversified and streamlined the services offered to theconsumer. However, despite this positive assessment, we must not overlook the growinginterdependence of economies, and the sovereignty risks that this greater intermediation is likelyto pose in a context of trade tensions. At the Banque de France and the ACPR, we are ready toassist the market in the transformations necessary to preserve and develop a robust andresilient European ecosystem, capable of ensuring the continued sovereignty of our monetaryand financial system. To achieve this, we will not hesitate to deploy our full range of actions andexpertise, a range that we have enriched by recognising the importance of experimenting with theecosystem.  4 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
Luis de Guindos: Interview with Cadena COPEInterview with Mr Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, and CadenaCOPE, conducted by Mr Carlos Herrera on 30 March 2020.*   *   *Are you teleworking? Are you in lockdown?Yes, we’re in lockdown and have been teleworking for almost a month now.I’d like to go back in time. You were in a very difficult place at an extremely difficult time,i.e. at the helm of the Spanish economy when the crisis that was triggered between 2007and 2008 reached its peak and Mario Draghi uttered the magic words “…whatever ittakes…”, which significantly calmed the markets. Can today’s crisis, which is different innature but devastating nonetheless, also be solved by either you or your Presidentsaying “we will do whatever is necessary”, and that will solve everything?We are already doing whatever is necessary. We have given banks as much liquidity as theyneed and the ECB is going to buy more than a trillion euros’ worth of euro area bonds. Spain willbenefit to the tune of around €120 billion. This is the Spanish economy’s main line of defencefrom a financial perspective at the moment.Is this how much Spanish banks, with the government’s approval, will be able to grant interms of loans to whoever asks for them?No, these are direct purchases made by the European Central Bank.Purchases of debt, of bonds?Exactly.Does this mean money for the government?Yes, ultimately. The purchases are made on the secondary market, but will also have an impacton the primary market. The ECB is taking steps to help avoid certain situations; do youremember what happened with the spread?Yes, it reached 650 points in Spain.The aim is to ensure spreads don’t widen dramatically and to keep the borrowing costs ofgovernments under control to avoid an increase in financial stress at this extremely challengingtime.Are you now sure we will be in recession at the end of this quarter?Yes. All of the scenarios being looked at, by the European Commission, the OECD, etc. indicatethat a recession will take hold. The main question is how long the lockdown period will last. If itlasts a long time, each month will see a fall of approximately two percentage points in GDP,according to the OECD calculations. If it lasts for three months, we would see a fall of sixpercentage points. These are fairly reliable calculations.What do you think of the government’s “I order, you foot the bill” approach? Meaningthat employers cannot lay anyone off but have to keep paying; maintain their expenditurewhile receiving no income. Could this result in the destruction of Spain’s, and possiblyother countries’, business infrastructure? 1 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
I mustn’t get into analysing specific policies. The Spanish government has taken a decision tointroduce stricter lockdown measures in the hope that this will in fact help to shorten thepandemic’s life cycle and break the chain of infection. Ultimately, although this will come at acertain cost, hopefully it will be outweighed by the benefits. This public health crisis will lead to avery severe recession. The assumption is that businesses will stop billing. And what we must dois try to keep as many of our businesses as possible afloat so that, after a certain period,economic activity can bounce back again. When companies stop billing, measures should betaken to try and keep their expenditure to a minimum. If their expenditure is fixed at a certain level,the only way out is for businesses to go bust. And that is what we must avoid.The Spanish government – I don’t know about other European governments – isproviding guarantees for loans to continue paying, but it’s not helping businesses with amoratorium on labour costs or on certain taxes.The issue of guarantees is a crucial one. The ECB has provided lots of liquidity to the banks. Thebanks have to pass this liquidity on to customers, namely SMEs and the self-employed. Soguarantees are important. We also need to allow tax liabilities, social security payments and thelike to be deferred. What’s important is that businesses that were entirely profitable before thestart of the pandemic survive it and become profitable again once it’s over. That goes for Spainand for all the countries in the euro area.Are the €120 billion of debt purchases kind of like the coronabonds that people arecalling for? Or is this something different?No, this is completely different. It’s direct intervention by the ECB. I’m in favour of coronabonds; Ithink they show solidarity.What would coronabonds involve?Coronabonds would be mutualised debt issuance by the entire euro area. They wouldn’t bebonds issued by Spain, Italy or Germany, but by an EU institution. But this isn’t the onlyinstrument we can use to defend [against the effects of the coronavirus], and it’s certainly not themost powerful. The most powerful is undoubtedly the European Central Bank, which is dealingwith a situation, in which also some countries with weaker fiscal positions require funding, so thatwe don’t see an emergence of the bond spread problem and an increase in borrowing costs.In the 2008 crisis you were looking far ahead. Everything came together in that momentduring the euro crisis. Four years went by before we could start to breathe freely. Thistime it’s a virus which, perhaps within a month, has been brought under control in oneway or another. Or in two months we might be able to breathe freely again. But neverbefore has so much damage been done in two months. Are the consequences this timegoing to be worse than back then?We will have to see. If this goes on for two months, there will be a recession but it won’t be anoverly deep one. If we get to three months, it will start to become more serious. I think it’simportant to bear in mind that, from the economic perspective, Europe remains the maineconomic and financial shield for an economy like Spain’s in times like these, in an emergencylike the one we’re in now. If we didn’t have a central bank like the ECB acting in the interests ofthe entire euro area – and in the interests of the Spanish economy – the funding costs of theSpanish economy would be soaring. In a situation like the one we’re in, imagine adding a debtcrisis to the public health crisis and the economic crisis. That’s what the ECB is preventing. Sothere’s a significant element of solidarity to this. And other things are being done too. Forexample, the European Investment Bank is going to launch a guarantee scheme. The EUbudgets will start working and making purchases. The EU institutions are acting in solidarity withall of the countries, also those that are most vulnerable, like Spain at the moment. 2 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
Nevertheless, the Spanish government is furious. When the Spanish Prime Ministertalks about Europe, especially about Germany and the Netherlands who are puttingobstacles in the way of the notorious coronabonds, he looks stony-faced. Sometimes,situations like this are used somewhat irresponsibly to stir up Euroscepticism.I’m not going to discuss specific topics, I will just give you the data. Currently, the ECB is clearlythe principal calming influence in the financial markets, with the €750 billion of bond purchasesthat we recently approved, plus the €120 billion we approved shortly before that, plus the €240billion we were already doing. This is ensuring that the cost of public debt, not just for Spain butalso for other countries, does not increase dramatically and that the issue of bond spreads doesnot rear its head again.Take a country with a debt level of 98% [of GDP], like Spain (not the highest in Europe,some other countries’ debt levels are even higher). How many years will it take to pay offthis debt increase?Budgets will deteriorate significantly, mainly because tax revenues will collapse. It remains to beseen who will be paying corporation tax, or VAT, or income tax, or social security contributions.But we all hope that this situation, this catastrophe, will be temporary. We’re talking about two orthree months. There will be an increase in debt. But what’s important is that, after this period isover, we get back on our feet and the Spanish economy begins generating activity andemployment again, as it was before. This is very much the hope.I wanted to ask you whether some of the southern European countries, and Spain inparticular, could once again be looking at a rescue scenario in the medium term.No. This is completely different from what happened in 2008, 2009 and 2010. This is a shock thatis affecting everyone – the plans enacted in 2009 and 2010 cannot be applied to the currentsituation.Almost all the letters of the alphabet have been used to describe the type of recovery wemight see: V-shaped, L-shaped, U-shaped… What will it be? And what is your opinion onessential industries being paralysed? The accusation levelled at us by northernEuropean countries is that Spain has squandered the opportunity to reduce its deficitduring a growth period, and now we’re paying the price.Spain reduced its deficit. In 2011 we had a government deficit of 9.6% and we reduced it to 2.5%.We have a high level of debt, close to 100% [of GDP]. Spain has acted responsibly, also from thepoint of view of its banking sector, which is not currently a cause for concern. The sector wassuccessfully restructured. And Spain is a very competitive country – the external sector is themain source of growth in the Spanish economy. The form the recovery takes will depend on howthe business landscape has changed. If we can avoid a situation where many companies gounder as we journey through this wilderness, I’m sure that when normal life resumes companieswill start hiring again and moving in the right direction. This will make it more of a V-shapedrecovery than a U-shaped one.And what about essential industries being paralysed?That is a political decision. The government thinks that it is accelerating the flattening of theinfection curve. I hope it works out. But it has an economic cost.If you were in government, would you have done the same?I can’t say. This crisis is unique. I think the guarantees were a good measure to take. We have totry to reduce the costs to firms and ensure that as many of them survive as possible. Because 3 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
this situation will pass. It’s temporary.Last question: if you were a minister now, would you be in favour of a total shutdown ofthe economy for a short period of time?I can’t answer that, I’m afraid. I’m not a minister now. I was a minister for more than six years, butnow I’m at the ECB. What I can tell you is that we at the ECB will do everything possible to keepthe euro together and to provide the best funding possible, under the best conditions possible, tothe euro area economies, including Spain. 4 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
BANK OF BOTSWANA  2020 MONETARY POLICY STATEMENT by  Moses D Pelaelo Governor  February 25, 2020  Introduction Distinguished Guests, on behalf of the Board, Management and Staff of the Bank, I am honoured and most delighted to welcome you to the launch of the 2020 Monetary Policy Statement.  I extend a special word of welcome to the Guest of Honour, Honourable Minister of Finance and Economic Development, his Cabinet colleagues, Members of Parliament and all Distinguished Guests attending this event for the first time.  We are most grateful to you all for having made the time to attend the launch.  Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, the publication and launch of the Monetary Policy Statement is an important event in the Bank’s calendar of events, for a good public policy reason.  It is a key aspect of good governance, transparency and accountability in the formulation and implementation of monetary policy.  Through the Statement, the Bank seeks to promote an understanding of the monetary policy framework and its objectives.  This helps to guide the public’s inflation 
 2 expectations towards convergence with the Bank’s inflation objective and, therefore, enhancing prospects for sustained maintenance of low, stable and predictable inflation. Specifically, the Bank uses the Monetary Policy Statement as an instrument to report on the inflation trajectory and policy performance in the past year; to outline and convey its prognosis of economic and other policy developments going forward; and, in turn, the prospective monetary policy response in the year ahead.   Background and Context In essence, the Statement commits the Bank with respect to its role in contributing to macroeconomic stability.  In this regard, it is propitious that the 2020 launch of the Monetary Policy Statement follows a Budget Speech that proposes a new direction for policy and economic management.  In addition, and coincidentally, the Bank, in collaboration with the International Monetary Fund and other development partners, recently concluded a workshop in Kasane on “fostering diversification to escape the middle-income trap” for Botswana.  The Workshop benefitted from contributions by representatives of countries, such as Chile, Costa Rica, Estonia, Mauritius and South Korea, which are considered to have been successful in advancing export and economic diversification.   
 3 Distinguished Guests, there are common themes that emerge from both the recent Budget Speech and the Kasane Workshop; and to which the Bank is also fully aligned.  First, that Botswana faces challenges of inclusive growth and evident structural transition, from historically higher growth rates of early years of its development to the current modest and inadequate levels to propel the economy to high-income status by 2036.  This is reflected by, or indeed because of, weak traction of export-led industrialisation strategy with a shrinking tradable sector and, in general, narrow economic base, high unemployment rates, as well as relatively high levels of poverty and income inequality, even as levels of incomes and prosperity are increasing somewhat.  Clearly, this situation requires urgent attention if the aspirations espoused in Vision 2036 and the desire to transit to high-income status are to be realised.   Second, is the need for structural reforms and transformation to improve productivity, ease of doing business, policy transmission and impact, institutional performance and leadership accountability, as well as the economic benefit of spending on infrastructure development and social services.  Third, is the imperative to improve on implementation of reforms and initiatives through timely evaluation of the impact and outcomes of the reforms as well as performance of responsible entities.  Fourth, it is critical to maintain macroeconomic balance, some 
 4 aspects of which fall within the Bank’s statutory mandate and, therefore, covered in the Monetary Policy Statement.  These relate to stability with respect to prices (inflation), the exchange rate and the financial sector. The other element of macroeconomic stability is fiscal sustainability, which was eloquently covered by the Honourable Minister in his maiden Budget Speech.  It would be remiss for me, however, if I do not mention that, while Botswana is ranked 91 out of 141 by the World Economic Forum 2019 Global Competitiveness Report, it is ranked number 1, with 32 other countries, on the macroeconomic stability pillar.  Honourable Minister and Distinguished Guests, the reason for this background is to highlight the fact that the Bank is alive to the development aspirations of the country and related challenges.  Furthermore, within the confines of its role and mandate, the Bank contributes to efforts to address the constraints to diversification and inclusive economic growth.  In essence, by focusing and consistently delivering on its specific roles, the Bank contributes to maintenance of a conducive macroeconomic environment for structural reforms and transformation initiatives to gain traction, potentially leading to higher rates of growth needed to elevate the economy to high income status.    
 5 Policy Track Record Honourable Minister, as we come to the end of the second decade of the third millennium, it is important to reflect on the Bank’s contribution, thus far, to macroeconomic stability.  After all, a key role for a central bank, by which it is ultimately judged, is the extent to which it succeeds in preservation of the value and integrity of the national currency, Pula and thebe.  Notably, the evolution of the monetary policy framework from the early 2000s has resulted in beneficial transition from high and volatile to the current low, stable and predictable inflation.  Similarly, the adoption of the crawling band exchange rate regime in 2005 and the subsequent public announcement of its key parameters, the coefficients of the basket currencies and the annual rate of crawl, have contributed to stability of the inflation-adjusted exchange rate.  It was also key to the success in achieving the inflation objective.   In addition, there has been, broadly, sound and effective banking supervision as well as beneficial collaboration by the various regulatory authorities that has contributed to stability of the financial sector, its growth and enhanced support for broader economic activity. A major lesson learnt from these developments is a reinforcement of the position that transparency, consistency and predictability of the policy 
 6 framework are essential ingredients for sustainable growth objectives and public confidence.  Distinguished Guests, I have to admit, however, that the levels of development of money and capital markets in Botswana need to be raised significantly.  This is with a view to improve on transmission and potency of macroeconomic policies and to have a greater impact on economic activity.  As of 2017, the composite financial index for Botswana (encompassing access, efficiency and depth) was two thirds that of Namibia, and a third and a quarter, respectively, of that for South Africa and Singapore.  Therefore, this is one of the areas to attend to in the transformation agenda.  Within such composite measures, Botswana falls short of international norms by nearly every metric and compares unfavourably with peer upper-middle income countries.  The nascent development of the interbank market and stock exchange are good examples in this regard.    Of particular concern is the paucity of supply of high-quality corporate debt instruments, fragmented credit markets and low level of development of the government bond market.  This situation presents undue constraints and risks to long-term infrastructure financing, fiscal sustainability and, more broadly, a headwind to capital markets development.  In other countries, a vibrant and highly liquid government securities market provides 
 7 a source of funding for government spending, including local authorities and other public sector entities.  This option is currently limited in Botswana and, therefore, its development offers a viable avenue for cost-effective domestic resource mobilisation for long-term investment and funding of government projects.   Going forward, therefore, policy consultations, involving the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development and the Bank, are focussed on designing a transparent and more frequent issuance of a sufficient quantum of domestic government securities in a predictable arrangement that, hopefully, will attract a larger pool of participants and support deficit financing, with lower risks.  This would be premised on the adoption of a strong governance architecture around public debt management, underpinned by the country’s well-established track record of prudent fiscal policy and strong institutions.    Furthermore, given the vulnerability of Botswana to trade shocks, climate change and consequent prolonged droughts, there is need to maintain sufficient fiscal and external buffers.  This means building sufficient resilience to afford the fiscal space to undertake countercyclical stabilisation when necessary.  The contribution of the Bank, in this regard, is through continued judicious management of the foreign exchange reserves to 
 8 preserve capital, generate returns for organic growth, and to ensure availability of foreign exchange, necessary for uninterrupted economic activity.    Monetary Policy Framework Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, the objective of the Bank’s monetary policy is to achieve price stability, defined as a low, stable and predictable level of inflation within 3 – 6 percent, in the medium term.  Monetary policy formulation is also aligned to safeguarding stability of the financial system.  In this regard, price stability as well as conducive monetary and financial conditions foster mobilisation of savings, productive investment, prudent allocation of credit and international competitiveness of domestic firms.  In turn, a sound and stable financial system is critical for effective transmission of monetary policy signals, facilitating the flow of funds and liquidity, as well as risk mitigation in support of economic activity.  Overall, therefore, the conduct of monetary policy and attention to financial stability support the national objectives of employment creation and sustainable economic growth.  Price and financial stability also help to preserve the value of incomes and long-term savings, especially for low income earners and pensioners, with less opportunity or wherewithal to protect their incomes or generate wealth by other means.  
 9 At this juncture I will, in turn, address three areas, namely, global trends that have influenced inflation in Botswana; highlights of the conduct of monetary policy, both internationally and here at home; and, finally, provide the medium-term inflation outlook and outline the likely policy stance in 2020.  External Economic Developments in 2019 Global GDP growth declined to an estimated 2.9 percent in 2019 compared to 3.6 percent in 2018.  The slowdown was widespread across countries and regions.  Global economic performance and sentiments were negatively affected by trade tensions between the US and China, as well as uncertain prospects for Brexit.  In the circumstances, global inflation eased from 3.6 percent in 2018 to 3.4 percent in 2019.  Inflation was subdued in the Special Drawing Rights (SDR) countries, increasing slightly from 1.7 percent in December 2018 to 2 percent in December 2019.  In South Africa, inflation decreased from 4.5 percent in December 2018 to 4 percent in December 2019.  Therefore, average inflation for the trading partner countries was constant at 2.9 percent in both 2018 and 2019.  Domestic Economic Developments in 2019 Domestic output expansion is estimated at 3.7 percent in the twelve months to September 2019, compared to 5 percent in the year to September 2018.  The lower increase in output is 
 10 attributable to, in the main, weaker performance of the mining sector. Growth in non-mining GDP also slowed, from 5.1 percent in the year to September 2018 to 4 percent in the corresponding period ending September 2019.  Inflation was below the lower bound of the objective range of 3 - 6 percent for most of 2019; and the outcome was broadly consistent with earlier projections.  Average inflation decreased from 3.2 percent in 2018 to 2.8 percent in 2019, largely because of base effects.  This is because the increase in some administered prices in 2018 was not repeated in 2019.  Overall, low inflation in Botswana was in the context of moderate domestic demand pressures and benign foreign inflation.  I hasten to mention that food prices reversed the 0.4 percent decrease in 2018 to a 3 percent increase in 2019.   The subdued pressure on inflation is also apparent from below-trend economic activity, signified by a negative output gap, as the economy continues to operate below potential.  However, Government expenditure grew by 15.4 percent in 2019 compared to an increase of 6.6 percent in the prior year.  Within this, personal emoluments rose by 14.4 percent, following the April 2019 public sector salary increase, and this would have been replicated by other major employers.  Nevertheless, the impact on inflation was muted.  It should be recognised, in this 
 11 respect, that there is significant externalisation of spending by both government and the private sector, including ready availability of imports, hence moderate impact of increased government expenditure and wages on domestic prices.  The other point to highlight is that the short-term impact of government spending on domestic demand is moderated to the extent that a significant component involves infrastructure and capacity development.  For Botswana, this type of spending tends to be import intensive.  Therefore, the economic benefits of such public investments are derived in the medium to long term.   At the same time, the recent labour force survey results, by Statistics Botswana, for the third quarter of 2019, indicate an unemployment rate of 20.7 percent.  This reinforces the assessment of below-potential performance of the economy, modest aggregate demand and, consequently, subdued pressures on inflation.    Distinguished Guests, the other component of demand, growth in commercial bank credit, eased marginally from 7.7 percent in 2018 to 7.6 percent in 2019, driven by a deceleration in lending to businesses, from 10 percent growth in 2018 to a contraction of 1.7 percent in 2019.  For households, annual credit growth increased from 6.2 percent in 2018 to 13.8 percent in 2019, in 
 12 the context of the increase in public sector wages.  Likewise, faster growth was recorded for personal loans, while the increase in mortgage loans was smaller in 2019 compared to 2018.  Overall, the rate of credit growth continued to be supportive of economic activity, with minimal risk to financial stability.   Global Monetary Policy Implementation in 2019 Honourable Minister and Esteemed Guests, monetary policy implementation in 2019 was mixed at the global level, in response to weak economic performance and restrained inflation across countries and regions.  It was, however, generally accommodative, with low levels of interest rates and continued liquidity support to the financial sector in some of the major economies.   Most central banks in the emerging market economies reduced their policy rates, given the need to support economic activity.  For example, closer to home, the South African Reserve Bank reduced the repo rate by 25 basis points to 6.5 percent in July 2019, and further to 6.25 percent in January 2020.  Domestic Monetary Policy Implementation in 2019 For its part, the Bank of Botswana continues to conduct monetary policy through a forecast-based policy framework, and that informs the response to deviations of inflation from the 
 13 objective range, in a forward-looking manner.  The analysis also involves assessment of divergence of actual output from potential output (the output gap), a primary indicator of the direction of future inflation.  The forecast incorporates projections of foreign inflation, exchange rates and changes in domestic administered prices and taxes.  In addition, the Bank evaluates the risks associated with the projected outlook.  In determining the appropriate policy response, the inflation forecast is considered alongside indicators of financial stability and economic activity, including relevant information from the quarterly Business Expectations Surveys.   In 2019, monetary policy was conducted in an environment of below-trend economic activity and a favourable medium-term inflation outlook; therefore, providing scope for maintaining an accommodative monetary policy stance in support of stronger output growth.  Hence, the Bank Rate was reduced by 25 basis points, from 5 percent to 4.75 percent in August 2019.  Consequently, the prime lending rate of commercial banks declined from 6.5 percent to 6.25 percent.  Deposit interest rates generally increased despite the high levels of market liquidity.  This seemingly paradoxical outcome can be explained by the funding structure of banks, characterised by competition for corporate and other volatile institutional deposits that are important for several of the commercial banks.  
 14 The increase in market liquidity that needed to be sterilised resulted in outstanding Bank of Botswana Certificates (BoBCs) of P8.6 billion in December 2019, an increase from P8.2 billion in December 2018. BoBC yields decreased following the reduction of the Bank Rate.  Distinguished Guests, as I indicated last year, the Bank continuously evaluates monetary policy framework for effectiveness and, where appropriate, makes changes.  In 2019, the Bank introduced the 7-day BoBC as the main instrument for conducting monetary operations, replacing the then 14-day paper, together with what we called ‘reserves averaging’ in the determination of the Primary Reserves Requirement for banks.  This was with a view to improving the efficiency of liquidity management and policy transmission.  Both measures were welcomed by the market, with a positive effect as expected; that is, better liquidity management by both the Bank and the commercial banks.  Over time this is expected to reduce demand for excess reserves held for precautionary purposes; therefore, freeing up additional resources for productive lending by banks.   I am also pleased to report that the Financial Stability Council (FSC), whose primary mandate is to coordinate macro-prudential policy analysis and respond to threats to financial stability, was launched in February 2019.  As indicated, the Council comprises 
 15 the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development, Bank of Botswana, Non-Bank Financial Institutions Regulatory Authority and the Financial Intelligence Agency.  The Council commenced work and achieved three important milestones.  First, is the publication of the maiden Financial Stability Report in September 2019.  The Report concluded that the Botswana financial sector was sound, stable and resilient, even looking ahead.  However, there is a continuing need to address market conduct and governance in some segments of the industry.  Furthermore, there are outstanding matters relating to effective compliance with the anti-money laundering and combating the financing of terrorism requirements.  Notwithstanding, significant progress continue to be made for the country to be removed from the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) grey listing by December 2020.  Second, the Council adopted a macroprudential policy framework for Botswana, which outlines the analytical framework and tools to be deployed to mitigate systemic risk.  Third, consultations were initiated on prospects for establishing a Deposit Protection Fund.  The Fund would provide insurance and a mechanism for paying out a predetermined amount of customer deposits in the event of a bank failure.  It will, therefore, be complementary to the existing framework of banking regulations, minimum prudential standards, ongoing 
 16 supervision and resolution frameworks.  Subject to the outcome of the industry consultations, the Financial Stability Council will seek authority for promulgation of the law to establish the Fund.  Global Economic Prospects in 2020 Honourable Minister and Distinguished Guests, now looking ahead, the global economy is expected to grow by 3.3 percent in 2020, higher than the estimated expansion of 2.9 percent in 2019.  The projection is premised on anticipated recovery of the underperforming emerging market economies.  Overall, risks to the global economic activity are, however, skewed to the downside.  The key risks to the outlook include continuance of geopolitical tensions, uncertain trade relations, social unrest in some jurisdictions, as well as the adverse impact of Covid-19.   Global inflationary pressures are forecast to be modest in the short to medium term given below-potential output.  In this environment, monetary policy will remain accommodative in most economies, complemented by measures aimed at facilitating financial intermediation, while fostering resilience of the financial sector, to support growth in economic activity.   Domestic Economic Prospects in 2020 Distinguished Guests, the domestic economy is forecast to grow by 4.4 percent in 2020, higher than the estimate of 3.6 percent 
 17 for 2019.  The improvement is premised on conducive financing conditions associated with accommodative monetary policy and a sound financial environment.  The implementation of ease of doing business reforms and concerted efforts towards economic transformation should also be positive for economic activity.    The crawling band exchange rate policy has served the country well and will continue to complement monetary policy.  This bodes well for maintenance of international competitiveness of domestic industries and macroeconomic stability.  As announced at the beginning of the year and broadly consistent with Botswana’s trade pattern, the weights of the constituent currencies in the Pula Basket are 45 percent for the South African rand and 55 percent for the SDR.  A downward rate of crawl of 1.51 percent of the nominal effective exchange rate is also being implemented in 2020.  With low inflation, the policy framework allows flexibility to further loosen real monetary conditions through a downward crawl to enhance competitiveness of the domestic industry and support economic growth.   Overall, both external and domestic pressures on inflation are expected to be benign, and it is projected that inflation will revert to within the Bank’s 3 – 6 percent medium-term objective range from the second quarter of 2020.  The forecast incorporates a possible hike in water and electricity tariffs, as well as the 
 18 announced increase in public service salaries in the 2020/21 financial year.  Furthermore, it takes into account the small impact of the 1.51 percent downward rate of crawl on import prices.  Having said that, I should be quick to caution that any upward adjustment in administered prices and government levies and/or taxes and any increase in international commodity prices that is substantially beyond current projections present upside risks to the inflation outlook.  In contrast, downside risks to inflation arise from prospects of weak global economic activity, the tendency of the ongoing technological progress to lower costs and prices as well as a possible fall in international commodity prices.  Monetary Policy Stance Distinguished Guests, based on available data, the current projections suggest that domestic inflation will, in the short term, revert to and remain within the Bank’s medium-term objective range of 3 – 6 percent.  This favourable medium-term outlook for inflation is in the context of moderate growth in economic activity and a sound and stable financial system.  Therefore, prospective developments augur well for maintenance of an accommodative monetary policy that supports productive lending to businesses and households, resulting in welfare enhancements that also drive economic activity.  The implementation of monetary policy will continue to focus on 
 19 entrenching expectations of low, predictable and sustainable inflation, through timely responses to price developments; while at the same time, taking due care to ensure that policy decisions are consistent with durable financial stability and support sustainable economic growth and employment creation.  Conclusion Honourable Minister and Distinguished Guests, I wish to conclude by underscoring that the continuing success in achieving price and financial stability, to which the Bank remains fully committed must, in the end, involve the cooperation of all key players in the economy, including Government, parastatals and the private sector.  The other point to conclude with is that, given that monetary and fiscal policies are expansionary for longer, immediate and effective implementation of transformation initiatives and structural reforms (so-called policy rotation) would raise prospects for faster growth and economic diversification, needed to attain high-income status within the Vision 2036 period.   Honourable Minsters, Distinguished Guests, it is worth reminding us all, that, in as much as prices matter, ultimately, total factor productivity, global competitiveness of domestically produced goods and services as well as innovation and environmentally sound policies are critical for greater prosperity and social 
 20 welfare.  Furthermore, nothing that I have said today suggest, in any way, that, aggregate demand management is easy, however one is well informed.  On the contrary, central banks across the globe are subject to intense and often critical scrutiny, especially at periods such as now of “low inflation and for long” with the likely danger of build-up of global financial vulnerabilities.  All I have tried to do, today, is to share with you the likely considerations that would guide monetary policy decisions in 2020, putting these in the wider context of challenges facing not just the domestic but also the global economy.  The Speaker of the National Assembly, Honourable Ministers, Honourable Members of Parliament, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, I thank you for your kind attention.  
Isabel Schnabel: Interview in Frankfurter AllgemeineSonntagszeitungInterview with Ms Isabel Schnabel, Member of the Executive Board of the European CentralBank, in Frankfurter Allgemeine Sonntagszeitung, conducted by Mr Patrick Bernau and MrDennis Kremer and published on 21 March 2020.*   *   *Ms Schnabel, never before has the ECB provided so much money for asset purchases insuch a short period of time. Is this crisis worse than anything we’ve seen before?It’s an extraordinary crisis. It’s not just Europe that is affected, it’s the whole world. And in additionto the health problems and the human suffering, we’re also experiencing a severe economicshock that is being compounded by the protective measures taken. Our new asset purchaseprogramme, which has been put in place specifically for this pandemic emergency, aims toaddress the particular nature of the situation we are facing.Where do you see the biggest problems?The crisis is affecting supply and demand at the same time. Initially, the focus was mainly ondisrupted supply chains. Now the protective measures taken are also hampering production inmany companies. And demand is falling too – if people don’t know what the future will bring, theyhold on to their money, especially since many activities have been curtailed. Companies areinvesting less. And all that means that we are already facing a massive shock; we need to makesure that it doesn’t get even worse.If the ECB buys sovereign bonds, governments will be able to borrow money more easilyand pass it on to firms. Is that still in line with your mandate?Our actions are always determined by our mandate of price stability. And for this we need afunctioning transmission mechanism so that monetary policy is passed on to the real economy.That mechanism had recently become impaired, as manifested by the sudden rise in euro areagovernment bond yields. It was affecting all euro area countries, even Germany. When thathappens, monetary policy has to step in.So it’s not a rescue plan for Italy?No, of course not. And Italy has not lost its market access. The concern was rather that we couldstart to see self-reinforcing price spirals……meaning that investors start selling, government bonds fall in value, and so even moreinvestors have to sell……which can always happen in times of crisis, especially when capital is seeking safe havens.The central bank must act to counter such effects when the transmission of monetary policy tothe real economy is at risk.One week ago, ECB President Christine Lagarde said that the ECB isn’t responsible forclosing risk premia on government bonds. Did that create additional uncertainty?The markets were questioning whether the ECB continued to stand ready to do everythingnecessary to stabilise the situation. But that was never in any doubt. And then the situation in themarkets deteriorated rapidly, so we had to take further action.Are there any rules at all now for such asset purchases, or does the ECB just do what it 1 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
likes?Our purchase programmes are rules-based. We continue in principle to buy bonds in line withthe capital share of each country. But we need more flexibility now, over time as well as acrosscountries and asset classes, in order to tackle the situation appropriately.Would you have liked to go into this crisis with higher interest rates, so that you couldcut rates now?Interest rates have been set appropriately also in recent years. Higher interest rates were not anoption – otherwise we wouldn’t have been able to fulfil our price stability mandate and we wouldhave damaged the economy. I know very few economists who are of a different view.Some people are already calling for signals to hike interest rates once the crisis is over.Your newspaper featured a guest commentary last week on the subject. In view of the currentsituation, that article seems a little out of place. We are looking at what might well be one of theworst economic crises of all time. It seems inappropriate to be talking about raising interest ratesnow.The authors of that piece were talking about the period after the crisis.We should talk about what happens after the crisis at a later date. For now we need toconcentrate on mitigating the effects of this crisis.Yes, but one does get the impression that every crisis sees the introduction of newmeasures which then can’t really be unwound afterwards, and then central banks have tocome up with something bigger and better in the next crisis. Is that the right wayforward?The new package is proportionate to the situation. It will only run until we have overcome thiscrisis. Your question also seems to suggest that we need to return to the former style ofmonetary policy, that is before the ECB began to purchase bonds. But that is not necessarily thecase. There are long-term trends that have resulted in very low real interest rates. Among otherthings, these trends reflect demographic ageing and declining productivity gains. A central bankcannot counter that.The banks are also a cause for concern. Do they have enough capital to survive thiscrisis?It is imperative to prevent the crisis from spreading to the banking sector. That’s why measurestargeting liquidity bottlenecks in firms are especially effective; they work by warding off high levelsof loan defaults at banks. We should be glad that the banks’ capital requirements weresignificantly increased over the past few years. All in all, the banks are currently much betterprepared for a crisis than they were before the financial crisis of 2008.But is that enough in the face of the current shock?We are indeed living through a scenario that no one could have imagined. It was therefore neverassessed in a stress test – we are unfortunately experiencing it now in real time. If widespreadinsolvencies occured among borrowers, the banking sector would also be affected. But in manycases, the issue in the first instance is a liquidity bottleneck. That’s something politicians candeal with. The decisive factor is how long the crisis persists.How long can the economy withstand such a situation? 2 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
It depends on how severe the restrictions are and on how well-placed firms are to adjust to them.In some sectors, this is relatively unproblematic; in others, for example catering, it’s hardlyfeasible. At some point, this situation will presumably become unsustainable, prompting thequestion as to what role the state intends to play in supporting firms.Would the ECB then be able to do even more? Or has it completely exhausted its scopefor action?The ECB is in the comfortable position of having a large set of tools, none of which has beenused to its full extent. We stand ready to take further measures if needed to fulfil our mandate.This was decided by the ECB’s Governing Council.So you really want to buy even more bonds? What effects do you envisage?We have a wide range of instruments: we have the key interest rates, we have instruments forproviding liquidity to the banks and we have the asset purchase programmes. All of theseinstruments can be used to improve financing conditions. That is immensely important duringsuch a crisis. The claim that central banks have run out of tools simply doesn’t match up to thefacts.The German Constitutional Court might put a spanner in the works when it rules on thelegality of the bond purchases in May.Against this backdrop, it’s important that our measures are proportionate. Given the severity ofthis crisis and the threat of massive economic damage, our monetary policy decisions are in myview appropriate. By the way, the Court’s judgement relates to the existing asset purchaseprogrammes the rules of which we have basically left unchanged.Would it help if crisis bonds, jointly issued by the euro area countries, were nowavailable?That could help. The success of our measures hinges on what happens on the fiscal policy side.We can’t resolve the situation by ourselves. Much has already been done at the national level,also in Germany. But it is ultimately a European problem. No country can be indifferent to what isgoing on in another European country – not only for the sake of solidarity, but also for economicreasons. I hope that this is understood by the politicians.What should they do?There are proposals to use the European Stability Mechanism or the European Investment Bank.The issuance of one-off “corona bonds” would also be conceivable. It is up to politicians todecide.How many people are still working in the ECB tower?Only a handful of people are still on site. Almost everything is taking place remotely, even themeetings of the ECB’s Executive Board. I’m also hardly in the ECB building now and am workingmainly from home. 3 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
Fabio Panetta: Interview in Corriere della SeraInterview with Mr Fabio Panetta, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, inCorriere della Sera, conducted by Mr Daniele Manca on 14 March 2020 and published on 15March 2020.*   *   *The question everyone would like to ask of someone following the situation up close,minute by minute, is: are Europe and the euro strong?I am not in any doubt about the strength of the euro. During the financial crisis, we were able toovercome difficult situations, thanks to the efforts made by the people of Europe. We succeededby working together and by putting in place policies that were mutually reinforcing. It’s importantthat, at such a difficult time, national governments and European institutions implement commonpolicies in a timely fashion. Right now we’re working towards tomorrow’s Eurogroup meeting –there needs to be a joint response to this crisis which, let’s not forget, is affecting every countryin Europe. And the ECB is working with Europe to strengthen that response.The stock market fell sharply after the ECB President’s press conference on Thursday.Influential voices joined in with the criticism that followed, and even the Italian Presidentgot involved. But is the ECB ready to help Italy?The decisions we took this week demonstrated that we are ready and able to play our part.Regardless of any isolated events that may occur in the heat of the moment, at a time ofimmense pressure and hard work, the ECB and the national central banks have decided to takestrong action and apply all the flexibility needed at present, and we have resolved to adopt furthermeasures if necessary. Facts are what count right now, and we will do everything we have to,within our mandate.What concrete action can the ECB take to help Italian firms and households?First of all, let me say that the economic consequences of the pandemic will need to beaddressed first and foremost by governments. They are the ones that are able to implement swiftand decisive measures to support healthcare systems, employment and household income.They are the ones who can take targeted action to help firms, providing public guarantees inorder to channel credit and liquidity to companies affected by the crisis. So it’s a positive stepthat European governments are following the example of the Italian government and are takingaction.And what about the ECB?These actions will reinforce the effects of the measures put in place by the ECB. Monetary policyis supporting firms and households by keeping interest rates exceptionally low, even negative,and ensuring that banks are able to continue lending to the economy. The measures we havejust taken seek to ensure that lending to the real economy does not contract, and, if possible,increases. Banks can now obtain €3,000 billion of funding from the ECB at the most favourableconditions there have ever been. We expect these measures to help those sectors worstaffected by the crisis, in particular the small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) that playsuch a key role in the Italian economy. Finally, we shouldn’t forget that the ECB’s bankingsupervision arm, which also involves the national authorities, has taken action in recent days toensure that the crisis does not prevent banks from supporting the economy. Banks will nowmake use of the scope this gives them to support firms and households, not to increase salariesor dividends.Can you explain what you decided last Thursday, because the markets didn’t really 1 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
understand it at first. The Italian stock market fell by 17% …Last Thursday we reduced the cost of funding for banks, provided that they, in turn, pass on thatfunding to firms and households – effectively, we further reduced the cost of lending to theeconomy. We took measures aimed at easing the eligibility criteria for the assets used by banksas collateral in our refinancing operations. We have not, so far, reduced the interest rate on thedeposit facility (the rate which is currently relevant for monetary policy, and which is below zero);however, further cuts would be possible if warranted by the economic outlook.And on government bonds?We increased our asset purchase programme by €120 billion, which will allow us to addresstensions in the government bond markets. In the course of this year, we will make net purchasestotalling €360 billion. If necessary, this programme could be expanded again. The turbulenceseen in the Italian government bond market in recent days is undesirable and needs to beallayed. Large, unwarranted increases in spreads, caused by the grave health crisis – which riskfragmenting the euro area government bond market and undermining the transmission ofmonetary policy – will be addressed decisively. The package of measures that we adopted thisweek allows us to act flexibly in terms of both the pace and the composition of our assetpurchases, meaning that we have the possibility to focus our efforts on asset classes andcountries that come under pressure.At a time of heightened market sensitivity, seeing the possibility of purchasing corporatebonds open up has created the impression that the ECB is less focused on purchasingsovereign bonds.This is a misperception. The asset purchase programme was relaunched by the GoverningCouncil in September, when Mario Draghi was President, and has been expanded in recent daysunder the presidency of Christine Lagarde. It is a necessary tool to bolster the effectiveness ofmonetary policy when there is less room to use the traditional interest rate tool. The purchasesinvolve both public and private sector bonds, with the aim of facilitating the achievement of theprice stability objective. But, in fact, the operations primarily involve public sector bonds, whichrepresent over 80% of purchases carried out thus far.There is a lack of liquidity in the economy and this problem will become increasinglyacute. These sales on the financial markets are aimed at selling bonds to obtain liquidity.I am obliged to be boring: we have all the necessary tools, we are using them decisively and areable to do even more. At present our monetary policy operations ensure unlimited liquidity for thebanks. Liquidity stress could emerge among non-bank intermediaries. If necessary for theconduct of monetary policy or to safeguard the stability of the financial system, the GoverningCouncil could consider whether and how to expand the list of intermediaries that can be suppliedwith liquidity and the rules for participating in our refinancing operations.Christine Lagarde told European leaders that if no action is taken we run the risk of ashock like the one seen in 2008. Is that the case?The global shock we face could be even worse than the one in 2008 if it is not managed with thenecessary care. In the two weeks preceding the meeting of the ECB’s Governing Council, themarkets fell faster than they did when Lehman Brothers collapsed. Today the shock is morecomplex and potentially wider reaching. The risk of the rapid spread of the virus is causing us tomake much greater changes to our daily lives than was the case ten years ago. Just look aroundat the closed businesses and schools.We will have to revise our growth estimates. Should we prepare for a recession? 2 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
The effect of the crisis will depend on the policies we implement and could reduce growth by afew percentage points, for Italy and other European countries. It is therefore good that policyresponses are being activated. The sooner a plan to kick start the economy is ready, the better itwill be. I also hope that the geopolitical tensions of recent months will weaken, so as tostrengthen confidence. We cannot allow other shocks to occur, such as trade or currency wars.The other central banks have also taken action, but it has not sufficed to reassure themarkets – a sign that monetary policy has become less effective or confirmation thatcentral banks can do a great deal but they cannot do everything?Some may hold the view that central banks are practically omnipotent. This is a false impressionthat could distort public debate, by attributing to central banks responsibilities and tasks that arebeyond their remit. Central bankers should be well-versed in their tools, but should also knowtheir limits. Monetary policy is a very powerful tool for influencing the financial markets, theprocess of creating credit to the economy, consumption and investment decisions, job creationand inflation. But it cannot influence the healthcare system, it cannot make people start going torestaurants and theatres again.There are a great many reasons for pessimism. Can you give any reasons for Italians tobe optimistic?I can give them many reasons. In economic terms, we have a strong private sector with lowhousehold indebtedness, an internationally competitive manufacturing sector, a positive balanceof payments and a balanced international investment position. We must not let the crisis weakenus. We have improved the situation of the banks, albeit not without effort. But the main reason forpride and optimism is the great unity and determination in response to the emergency of the virusshown by our country in a very difficult situation. I am thinking of the people working in thehospitals and institutions, but above all the Italian citizens, who are calmly enduring severehardships for the sake of safeguarding the public good. 3 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
Luis de Guindos: Interview with Radio NacionalInterview with Mr Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, and RadioNacional, conducted by Mr Iñigo Alfonso on 18 March 2020.*   *   *Mr de Guindos, how are you? Good morning.Good morning.Thank you very much for being with us during these very challenging times for ourcountry, and for Europe in general. You were one of the government ministers who hadto deal with the long economic crisis that began in 2008. Are there any parallels with thiscrisis? Is there a risk that it could be as damaging as the Great Recession? Are youconcerned that it will be?No, I think the current situation is different. We are experiencing a health crisis, a pandemic,which will obviously have a significant impact on economic activity. There will be sectors whoseturnover will essentially be reduced to zero. But the key difference is that we expect this to betemporary. The word “temporary” is very important here. The 2008 crisis lasted until 2013 inSpain. We’re talking about the current situation lasting for weeks or months, not longer.Christine Lagarde, the ECB President, is calling on governments to take action to avoidthis apocalyptic scenario. Are they taking action? Do you think they took note of what shesaid?Yes, I think they have begun to take action. In terms of fiscal policy, we have seen that theSpanish government, the French government, the German government… All of them are takingfiscal policy measures, essentially to create a sort of “bridge” for this temporary period in whichwe are dealing with the health crisis and this infection. So yes, I think that measures have beentaken at the national level. At the European level, that’s a different question.Why do you mention “European”? Because you think that the response of governmentshas been found wanting so far?I think having a joint, pan-European response would be very important. For example, I thinkhaving a single fiscal instrument for the euro area would have been crucial. But we aren’t going tolook backwards. There are still possibilities. On Monday, for example, the Eurogroup consideredthe possibility of the European Stability Mechanism (ESM) acting jointly for all Europeancountries. And then there is the ECB, of course.This European Stability Mechanism is a governance tool that came out of the previouscrisis. Do you think this rescue fund should take action? Could it still help to make thissituation just a little more bearable for millions of Europeans?Yes, it could take action because it has a capacity of €410 billion. The circumstances are totallydifferent to those of the debt crisis, but clearly an instrument with a capacity of €410 billion is ofinterest to us.Do you think the Spanish government’s plan is well targeted? Do you think it will behelpful?I think so. The €100 billion of guarantees are very significant. The ECB has given banks all theliquidity in the world, one could say. But if the banks are not able to pass this liquidity on to theircustomers because they have doubts about their customers’ creditworthiness, then it’s all for 1 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
nothing. I think the plan for €100 billion of guarantees is key here, because it’s a guarantee foreveryone that the ECB’s liquidity will actually get to where it needs to go. So yes, this is very wellthought out. Another important issue is the measures to ensure that the situation regardingworkers is flexible during this period. We are going to have a situation where many firms thatwere perfectly solvent are now struggling. So everything that helps workers, such as thetemporary layoffs (in Spanish: expedientes de regulación temporal, or ERTEs) or reduced [socialsecurity] contributions, is a step in the right direction. Overall, I think the government’s plan is theright one, it’s going in the right direction and I hope everyone supports it.Thanks to its deficit, its indebtedness, Spain has limited room to activate fiscalmeasures. Given that this is an extraordinary situation, do you think that the EU shouldset aside the financial orthodoxy of recent years and move towards being more flexible?It’s already set it aside, hasn’t it? The EU has said that it is not going to apply the Stability andGrowth Pact, that there is an escape clause, so governments will be able to spend more. Therewill be a natural deterioration of public finances. But I say again, this is not like 2008, when therewas a severe, long-lasting deterioration. Now it’s about tackling an emergency, a healthemergency, and acting as coherently as possible.The latest measures taken by the European Central Bank – you mentioned earlier therole your institution has to play during this crisis – have failed to calm the markets. Doesthe ECB have an ace up its sleeve, if I can use that expression? Or will it provide areminder of President Draghi’s words, “whatever it takes to preserve the euro. Andbelieve me, it will be enough.”?I think that the ECB President Christine Lagarde has made it clear that we will do what needs tobe done. There is no doubt about that. This crisis is different. It is not financial in nature. It couldbecome financial if we did nothing, but it’s not a financial crisis. It’s a health crisis that will have ahuge economic impact. What we can do is relieve any financial pressures that may arise. Butthe main action will come from governments, through fiscal policy.The ECB has announced that it will buy more debt, that it will inject liquidity.That is correct, we have announced that we will buy €120 billion more than we were buyingbefore. The previous figure was €240 billion, and we can be flexible in our approach. We will alsoensure that the markets continue to function properly, that fragmentation does not occur,particularly with the spreads, since this would affect the transmission of our monetary policyimpulses. That’s why we are taking decisive action.Are you in favour of adjusting interest rates like the US Federal Reserve or the Bank ofEngland?Our interest rates were already much lower. First of all, I feel that the most important step to takewas to introduce liquidity measures. European banks have all the liquidity they need at theirdisposal, under very favourable conditions. The second step comes through bond purchases.These two measures will have a much greater effect than adjusting interest rates, which inEurope were already –0.50%.The volatility that the markets are experiencing, the instability: is it temporary? Do youthink that investors will somehow calm down once they see all of the measures that havebeen taken starting to take effect?As you mentioned earlier, I think that all of the central banks, all of the governments, we are goingto do everything we possibly can. But calm will return once we actually start to see that theepidemic is under control. That is the key issue. Take China for example. China is a leading 2 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
indicator of what might happen. After experiencing a drastic fall in economic activity for twomonths, things have started to recover there and we can see how the economic situation isgradually getting back to normal. This is the most important thing we must take into account andwhich will undoubtedly help calm investors and the economy.Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, thank you very much forspeaking to us. I think that you have also been in confinement lately, is that correct?Yes, that’s correct. We have been teleworking for more or less ten days now.And how do you organise your work? Do you maintain contact with colleagues inFrankfurt, Madrid, etc?We hold teleconferences all the time, and there is of course a small team of people who areworking on site at the ECB premises. Everything else is handled via teleconference.From now on, ECB decisions taken at meetings called by the President and theGoverning Council, can they be taken as normal via videoconference? Can you takeeffective measures from there?Yes, of course. The Executive Board is now always held by teleconferences, for example. Wespeak every day. We hold team meetings. We continue to operate because teleworking ispossible. It’s not ideal, but clearly in these circumstances it’s the only option available and itworks relatively well.Well, that is a good sign, isn’t it? That everything hasn’t ground to a halt.Yes, of course it hasn’t.Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, thank you very much forspeaking with us.Thank you. 3 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
Isabel Schnabel: Interview in Die ZeitInterview with Ms Isabel Schnabel, Member of the Executive Board of the European CentralBank, in Die Zeit, conducted by Ms Lisa Nienhaus on 16 March 2020 and published on 18 March2020.*   *   *Ms Schnabel, where are you speaking from at the moment: your home office?No, I’m in the main building of the European Central Bank in Frankfurt. As the board memberresponsible for market operations, I need to be on site. But many of us, including other membersof the ECB’s Executive Board, are indeed working from home. And I am also keeping at a safedistance from colleagues.Indeed, it would not be good if you were absent from the ECB. Market prices arecollapsing, loans are defaulting, firms are threatened by bankruptcy if they don’t gethelp. Is the virus crisis now turning into a financial crisis?We are living through turbulent times: stock markets are showing exteme volatility, equity priceshave fallen dramatically. And the events are gradually being reflected in the data that we receivefrom the real economy. We know that production in China collapsed in January and February. Allthat will also have an impact on the banking system, but there is no acute banking crisis atpresent. We are, however, carefully monitoring the current situation so that we are able torespond swiftly to new developments should that become necessary.Which indicators are you looking at?We monitor all financial market data: equity prices, interest rates, capital flows. Corporate andsovereign debt markets are also important.What is going on there?We have seen a sharp increase in the risk premia that firms have to pay when raising debt onthe markets. For high-risk firms in particular, these risk premia have shot up.Yields for countries such as Italy have also increased signficantly.We see a broad increase in risk premia. Another question that arises is whether the markets arestill functioning. Is supply still matching demand? The central bank should intervene if liquiditydries up, that is if the markets suddenly seize up because of a lack of available liquid funds, or ifthe transmission of monetary policy is endangered, that is if our measures are not reaching thereal economy. And that is exactly what we have been doing in greater measure since lastThursday. Our bond purchases have a stabilising effect on the market.US Treasuries have seen some severe temporary disruptions.There was a series of short intervals in which the trade in US Treasuries was disrupted. That’s asign of considerable nervousness in the markets. Besides the markets, we are closelymonitoring the situation of banks in Europe. We have taken measures to prevent banks fromhaving to overly restrict their lending during the crisis. But the pressure on banks will intensify ifeconomic conditions deteriorate. We are also closely watching investment funds.What is happening there?Up to now we have only seen isolated capital outflows but we need to keep an eye on that. In the 1 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
event of large outflows from investment funds, the main concern would be to prevent anexcessive fall in prices caused by fire sales – that is, distressed sales of assets at large pricediscounts.On Sunday, the world’s central banks decided on extensive coordinated measures. TheECB announced a first major package on Thursday. What is the point of all that if thefinancial crisis has not yet set in?The situation in financial markets is already very tense. Last Thursday, we decided to provideabundant and very cheap liquidity to the banking system. That is the primary task of centralbanks at present. On Sunday, in a coordinated effort with other major international central banks,we took measures to provide banks with cheap US dollar liquidity. We did so because banks insome countries, especially Japan, had been finding it harder to access US dollars.The US Federal Reserve slashed interest rates. The ECB stepped up its assetpurchases. But none of this seems to have had the desired effect. Equity pricescontinued to fall. What is going wrong?The ECB’s package was very comprehensive. But market volatility is partly masking the effects.Moreover, not all market participants seem to have immediately understood all of thecomponents of the programme. The additional net asset purchases in particular will help tocounter the self-reinforcing dynamics on the bond markets. We are helped by the operationalflexibility of the asset purchase programme, which we are already using to its full extent.So did the ECB communicate poorly?The key message of the programme should be clear. The ECB stands ready to do everythingwithin its mandate to counter market disruptions that impair the transmission of its monetarypolicy, because monetary policy cannot otherwise be effective. This is the unanimous decision ofthe Governing Council.Is it perhaps the case that central banks are simply powerless in this crisis?No, but monetary policy cannot resolve this crisis on its own. We also need a strong fiscalresponse, ideally at European level. Most economists agree that fiscal policy is currently themost important instrument with which to counter the crisis.Why?The ECB can provide banks with liquidity, but that doesn’t necessarily mean that the banks willactually lend to companies that are struggling because of the virus. That’s where the governmentcomes in. It can support the economy by issuing credit guarantees, for example. The package ofmeasures adopted by the German government on Friday contained guarantees of that kind.Other Member States have agreed on similar measures.The fiscal response at the international level hardly looks coordinated. Is that aproblem?Absolutely. We need a strong, joint fiscal policy response in Europe. This crisis is not limited toindividual Member States. Everyone is affected, and events in one country affect all othercountries too. I hope that this is clear to the decision-makers. In terms of monetary policy, we willdo our part to prevent fragmentation in the euro area.The border closures and all the different national arrangements we’ve seen suggest thatit is more like “everyone for himself” at the moment. 2 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
The primary goal has to be to contain the spread of the virus. It may be that closing borders is anappropriate step from that point of view. That’s something that virologists are best placed tojudge. But it’s clear that all protective measures come at an economic cost. And that is preciselywhy we need coordinated action, so that we can avoid deepening the crisis.But not every country can afford that.That’s true, and that’s precisely why we need European cooperation. What we need now isEuropean solidarity, also in financial terms. That is in the interest of all European countries.Is it even possible now to prevent a recession as a result of the virus crisis?We are experiencing a very severe economic shock. Supply chains are being disrupted and, atthe same time, demand is contracting as governments introduce protective measures: peopleare travelling less than before and cannot go out to restaurants and bars. Falling confidence mayalso dampen consumption and investment. And if people are not able to go to work, that has animpact on production, depending on the sector. So we are seeing many different effects emergeat the same time across the whole world. The likelihood of a recession has thus risenconsiderably.What is your expectation for economic growth?Our latest projections put euro area growth at 0.8% for this year. But that is now out of date. Wewill certainly have to adjust our projection significantly downwards.Below 0%?We don’t know yet. The greatest uncertainty is how long the crisis will last. Originally, manyeconomists thought that there would be a short, sharp crisis and that things would subsequentlypick up again quickly. It very much depends on how quickly the spread of the virus can becontained, but also on the economic policy reaction.You have done intensive research on financial crises of the past. Is there any crisis thatwas similar?The current situation cannot be compared with the 2008 financial crisis. That crisis originated inthe financial system. Today we are looking at a shock to the real economy that is affecting manycountries at the same time and for that reason is so devastating for the global economy. If wewant to draw a comparison, we should look at other pandemics.The Spanish flu?Yes, for example – that pandemic was indeed devastating. The precise figures are not known,but between 20 and 100 million people died back then. Now we are in a much better situation.First, medicine is much more advanced. During the Spanish flu pandemic, many people diedfrom secondary bacterial infections which can now be treated more effectively. And we areeconomically in a much better position to deal with a shock of this nature.Why?The internet puts a whole range of technical options at our disposal that allow us to continueworking. Our social security systems are much better. People will only stay at home if theycontinue to be paid when they get sick. At the same time, there is now more international divisionof labour than there was back then, so we feel the impact more strongly if supply chains breakdown.The economy is estimated to have contracted by 6% at the time of the Spanish flu. Is this 3 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
virus crisis economically less bad?No-one can say, but we will play our part in containing the economic consequences of this crisis. 4 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
Christine Lagarde: ECB press conference - introductory statementIntroductory statement by Ms Christine Lagarde, President of the European Central Bank, and MrLuis de Guindos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 12 March2020.*   *   *Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are very pleased to welcome you to our pressconference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing Council,which was also attended by the Commission Executive Vice-President, Mr Dombrovskis.Since our last Governing Council meeting in late January, the spread of the coronavirus (COVID-19) has been a major shock to the growth prospects of the global and euro area economies andhas heightened market volatility. Even if ultimately temporary in nature, it will have a significantimpact on economic activity. In particular, it will slow down production as a result of disruptedsupply chains and reduce domestic and foreign demand, especially through the adverse impactof the necessary containment measures. In addition, the heightened uncertainty negativelyaffects expenditure plans and their financing.Governments and all other policy institutions are called upon to take timely and targeted actionsto address the public health challenge of containing the spread of the coronavirus and mitigate itseconomic impact. In particular, an ambitious and coordinated fiscal policy response is required tosupport businesses and workers at risk. The Governing Council strongly supports thecommitment of euro area governments and the European Institutions to joint and coordinatedpolicy action in response to the repercussions of the spread of the coronavirus. We alsowelcome the decisions taken by the ECB’s Supervisory Board, which are detailed in a separatepress release published earlier today.In line with our mandate, the Governing Council is determined to support households and firms inthe face of the current economic disruptions and heightened uncertainty. Accordingly, wedecided on a comprehensive package of monetary policy measures. Together with thesubstantial monetary policy stimulus already in place, these measures will support liquidity andfunding conditions for households, businesses and banks and will help to preserve the smoothprovision of credit to the real economy.First, we decided to conduct, temporarily, additional longer-term refinancing operations (LTROs)to provide immediate liquidity support to the euro area financial system. Although we do not seematerial signs of strains in money markets or liquidity shortages in the banking system, theseoperations will provide an effective backstop in case of need. They will be carried out through afixed rate tender procedure with full allotment, with an interest rate that is equal to the averagerate on the deposit facility. The LTROs will provide liquidity at favourable terms to bridge theperiod until the TLTRO III operation in June 2020.Second, the Governing Council decided to apply considerably more favourable terms during theperiod from June 2020 to June 2021 to all TLTRO III operations outstanding during that sametime. These operations will support bank lending to those affected most by the spread of thecoronavirus, in particular small and medium-sized enterprises. Throughout this period, theinterest rate on these TLTRO III operations will be 25 basis points below the average rate appliedin the Eurosystem’s main refinancing operations. For counterparties that maintain their levels ofcredit provision, the rate applied in these operations will be lower, and, over the period ending inJune 2021, can be as low as 25 basis points below the average interest rate on the depositfacility. Moreover, the maximum total amount that counterparties will henceforth be entitled toborrow in TLTRO III operations is raised to 50% of their stock of eligible loans as at 28 February2019. In this context, the Governing Council will mandate the Eurosystem committees to 1 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
investigate collateral easing measures to ensure that counterparties continue to be able to makefull use of our funding support.Third, we decided to add a temporary envelope of additional net asset purchases of €120 billionuntil the end of the year, ensuring a strong contribution from the private sector purchaseprogrammes. In combination with the existing asset purchase programme (APP), this willsupport favourable financing conditions for the real economy in times of heightened uncertainty.We continue to expect net asset purchases to run for as long as necessary to reinforce theaccommodative impact of our policy rates, and to end shortly before we start raising the keyECB interest rates.In addition, the Governing Council decided to keep the key ECB interest rates unchanged. Weexpect them to remain at their present or lower levels until we have seen the inflation outlookrobustly converge to a level sufficiently close to, but below, 2% within our projection horizon, andsuch convergence has been consistently reflected in underlying inflation dynamics.We also intend to continue reinvesting, in full, the principal payments from maturing securitiespurchased under the APP for an extended period of time past the date when we start raising thekey ECB interest rates, and in any case for as long as necessary to maintain favourable liquidityconditions and an ample degree of monetary accommodation.Further details on the precise terms of our new operations will be published in dedicated pressreleases this afternoon at 15:30 CET.In view of current developments, the Governing Council will continue to monitor closely theimplications of the spread of the coronavirus for the economy, for medium-term inflation and forthe transmission of its monetary policy. The Governing Council stands ready to adjust all of itsinstruments, as appropriate, to ensure that inflation moves towards its aim in a sustainedmanner, in line with its commitment to symmetry.Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. Thelatest indicators suggest a considerable worsening of the near-term growth outlook. Thedisruption of supply chains is impeding production plans in the manufacturing sector, whilenecessary containment measures against the further spread of the coronavirus are adverselyaffecting economic activity. Before the coronavirus outbreak, euro area real GDP growthmoderated to 0.1%, quarter on quarter, in the fourth quarter of 2019, following growth of 0.3% inthe third quarter. This mainly reflected the ongoing weakness in the euro area manufacturingsector and slowing investment growth. Looking beyond the disruption stemming from thecoronavirus, euro area growth is expected to regain traction over the medium term, supported byfavourable financing conditions, the euro area fiscal stance and the expected resumption inglobal activity.This assessment is only partly reflected in the March 2020 ECB staff macroeconomicprojections for the euro area, as their data cut-off date predates the most recent rapid spread ofthe coronavirus to the euro area. These projections foresee annual real GDP increasing by 0.8%in 2020, 1.3% in 2021 and 1.4% in 2022. In particular, the projections foresee very muted growthin the first half of 2020, followed by an improvement in the second half of the year. Comparedwith the December 2019 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections, the outlook for real GDPgrowth has been revised down notably for 2020 and slightly for 2021, on account of the potentialeconomic impact of the coronavirus outbreak.The risks surrounding the euro area growth outlook are clearly on the downside. In addition to thepreviously identified risks related to geopolitical factors, rising protectionism and vulnerabilities inemerging markets, the spread of the coronavirus adds a new and substantial source ofdownside risk to the growth outlook. 2 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, euro area annual HICP inflation decreased to 1.2% inFebruary 2020, from 1.4% in January. On the basis of the sharp decline in current and futuresprices for oil, headline inflation is likely to decline considerably over the coming months.Indicators of inflation expectations have fallen and measures of underlying inflation remaingenerally muted. While labour cost pressures have so far remained resilient amid tighter labourmarkets, the weaker growth momentum is delaying their pass-through to inflation. Over themedium term, the increase in inflation will be supported by our monetary policy measures andthe recovery in euro area growth dynamics.This assessment is only partly reflected in the March 2020 ECB staff macroeconomicprojections for the euro area, which foresee annual HICP inflation at 1.1% in 2020, 1.4% in 2021and 1.6% in 2022. Compared with the December 2019 Eurosystem staff macroeconomicprojections, the outlook for HICP inflation is broadly unrevised over the projection horizon. Theimplications of the coronavirus for inflation are surrounded by high uncertainty, given thatdownward pressures linked to weaker demand may be offset by upward pressures related tosupply disruptions. The recent sharp decline in oil prices poses significant downside risks to theshort-term inflation outlook.Turning to the monetary analysis, broad money (M3) growth stood at 5.2% in January 2020,having moderated somewhat from its recent peak. Money growth continues to reflect ongoingbank credit creation for the private sector and low opportunity costs of holding M3 relative to otherfinancial instruments. The narrow monetary aggregate M1 continues to be the main contributor tobroad money growth.Loans to the private sector continued to expand. The annual growth rate of loans to householdspicked up somewhat to 3.7% in January 2020, from 3.6% in December 2019. The annual growthrate of loans to non-financial corporations remained unchanged at 3.2% in January, confirmingthe moderation seen since autumn 2019 and likely reflecting the typically lagged reaction to thepast weakening in the economy. Overall, our accommodative monetary policy stance, includingthe measures taken today, will safeguard favourable bank lending conditions and will continue tosupport access to financing, including for those affected most by the ramifications of thecoronavirus and, in particular, for small and medium-sized enterprises.To sum up, a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with the signals comingfrom the monetary analysis confirmed that an ample degree of monetary accommodation isnecessary for the robust convergence of inflation to levels that are below, but close to, 2% overthe medium term.Regarding fiscal policies, an ambitious and coordinated fiscal stance is now needed in view ofthe weakened outlook and to safeguard against the further materialisation of downside risks. Wewelcome the measures already taken by several governments to ensure sufficient health sectorresources and to provide support to affected companies and employees. In particular, measuressuch as providing credit guarantees are needed to complement and reinforce the monetarypolicy measures taken today. We welcome the commitment of the euro area governments andthe European Institutions to act now, strongly, and together in response to the repercussions ofthe further spread of the coronavirus.Before we take your questions, we would like to express our profound gratitude to all those whoare dedicating their time and efforts in saving lives and containing the spread of the coronavirus. 3 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
      2 The Terrace, PO Box 2498, Wellington 6140, New Zealand  Telephone 64 4 472 2029 Online at www.rbnz.govt.nz         Navigating at Low Altitude: Monetary Policy with Very Low Interest Rates   A speech delivered at the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Museum and Education Centre   On 10 March 2020  By Adrian Orr, Governor1                                                                  1 With deep appreciation of the dedicated team which has worked on these principles and tools.  
 2    Navigating at Low Altitude:  Monetary Policy with Very Low Interest Rates  Introduction  The Reserve Bank of New Zealand, Te Pūtea Matua, is tasked with promoting a sound and dynamic monetary and financial system.2  We enable New Zealanders to get on with their daily lives with the maximum confidence possible about their means of exchange (money), its purchasing power here and abroad, and the reliability and efficiency of critical financial services they rely on.  This is our contribution to Aotearoa, New Zealand, to “promote the prosperity and well-being of New Zealanders, and contribute to a sustainable and productive economy.”3   As kaitiaki (caretakers) of Te Pūtea Matua, our activities involve continuous policy assessment as to the most effective monetary policy and financial stability tools, and their best application.   This is highlighted by the ongoing Reserve Bank Act Review, which is aimed at ensuring we have a modern monetary and financial policy framework.4  The optimal frameworks can change over time based on global economic activity, changing technology, and evolving consumer and investor preferences as to how they transact and engage with the financial system.  We must be able to identify and respond to circumstances in an optimal fashion to continue to meet our mandate for Aotearoa, New Zealand.   A significant change is confronting our work at present, namely the low global (consumer) price inflation which has led to unprecedentedly low global nominal interest rates.  Our monetary policy framework needs to operate effectively and efficiently in this low inflation and interest rate world, and we must be aware of the intended and unintended consequences of our policy actions for inflation, employment, and financial stability and efficiency.   Today, I wish to outline how we got here, what the implications are for economic policy choices – including monetary and fiscal policy - and how Te Pūtea Matua has prepared itself to succeed.    This speech is about making sure our monetary policy framework remains effective. I do not discuss the outlook for our Official Cash Rate (OCR) as this is the task of our Monetary Policy Committee.  Their next assessment of the OCR is scheduled for March 25.  We also have no immediate intention to use the alternative monetary policy tools discussed in this speech. Any perceived monetary policy signals in this speech are thus in the eyes of the reader only and not intended by the author.                                                             2 Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act 1989 (RBNZ Act), http://www.legislation.govt.nz/act/public/1989/0157/latest/DLM199364.html 3 The purpose of the Reserve Bank, as set out in the RBNZ Act.  4 Treasury webpage on the Reserve Bank Act Review, https://treasury.govt.nz/news-and-events/reviews-consultation/reviewing-reserve-bank-act  
 3   I appreciate the heightened interest in our activities in the current economic environment and want you to rest assured that Te Pūtea Matua is fulfilling its broad role including ensuring a well-functioning financial system.   The monetary policy mandate of Te Pūtea Matua  The Reserve Bank is legally mandated to achieve and maintain stability in the general level of prices over the medium-term, and support maximum sustainable employment. When achieving these outcomes we must also have regard to the efficiency and soundness of the financial system, seek to avoid unnecessary instability in output, employment, interest rates and the exchange rate, and set policy with a medium-term orientation.5   Our mandate is an outcome of decades of economic research and practical experience both here and abroad.  It reflects the significant economic costs of high and variable inflation, the importance of having an operationally independent central bank with capability to achieve and manage stability in general prices, and the economic trade-offs that will occur as economic conditions change through time.  Our monetary policy – as in the majority of OECD countries – is typically implemented by controlling the short-term policy rate, in New Zealand the OCR. This operates through a simple principle: higher interest rates tend to lead to lower economic activity in the short-term and hence lower employment and inflation than would otherwise be the case.  For lower interest rates, the opposite is true.  Of course, this is simple but not easy. Underlying the relationship are complex transmission mechanisms that link the level of interest rates to inflation and employment.   The Reserve Bank’s Monetary Policy Handbook provides a stylised guide to the monetary policy transmission mechanism.6  Figure 1 provides a walk-through of the five main channels from shifting the OCR through to employment and inflation. These channels are savings and investment decisions; cash-flow access; asset prices and wealth; the NZ dollar exchange rate; and inflation expectations.                                                               5 Remit for the Monetary Policy Committee April 2019, https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/ReserveBank/Files/Monetary policy/About monetary policy/Remit-for-the-Monetary-Policy-Committee-April-2019.pdf  6 Monetary Policy Handbook, https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/monetary-policy/about-monetary-policy/monetary-policy-handbook 
 4   Figure 1: The monetary policy transmission mechanism  Source: RBNZ.        
 5   All of the monetary policy channels discussed are affected by one significant consideration for the economy of Aotearoa. New Zealand’s economy is small and open to the swings and roundabouts of global economic activity through our trade, capital flows, and migration.  Global economic, political, and financial market developments have a significant impact on our domestic economic activities – and hence the appropriate monetary policy setting to meet our mandate.    Unprecedented low global interest rates  Largely since post the ‘Great Financial Crisis (GFC)’ of 2008, global inflation and interest rates have been remarkably low. New Zealand’s neutral interest rate (i.e., the rate that, on average over time, would be consistent with no over- or under-utilisation of resources and stable inflation) has declined considerably (Figure 2), and we have had downward pressure on domestic inflation.    Figure 2: Neutral interest rate estimates  Source: RBNZ.  Global inflation has been declining for a variety of reasons over recent decades (Figure 3).7  In part the low and stable inflation rates are a sign of success of central banks’ focus of monetary policy on achieving and maintaining this goal.                                                                 7 Hawkesby, C. (2019). ‘Inflation Dynamics: Upside Down Down Under’, speech delivered at the BIS forum at the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas in Manila on 21 August 2019. 012345678901234567892006200820102012201420162018%%Suite of neutral interest rate estimatesOfficial Cash RateSuite (mean)
 6   Figure 3: Inflation in select advanced economies  Source: World Bank.   In addition, positive productivity shocks – through innovation and technology – has reduced the prices of many manufactured consumer goods.  Likewise, the advent of open global trade and ‘single price’ discovery via the internet has led to competition and further reductions in price levels and inflation.    Finally, there have been significant influences on the level of ‘neutral interest rates’ globally, including ageing populations with less propensity to consume, reduced wage bargaining leverage for workers as labour mobility and product sourcing has broadened, and declining productivity growth as technologies have matured.  On top of these long-term trends towards lower rates, adverse cyclical events - especially during and post the GFC - have driven many central banks to reduce interest rates to their effective lower bound (Figure 4) as a means to stimulate demand i.e., to continue to meet their inflation mandate.      -5051015202530-5051015202530196019651970197519801985199019952000200520102015%%New ZealandAustraliaUnited KingdomUnited StatesEuro area
 7     Figure 4: Central bank policy rates in select advanced economies  Source: Bloomberg.     Monetary policy instruments in times of record low interest rates   As central banks’ policy rates approached their effective lower bounds, they have had to find other ways to influence peoples’ spending/saving habits, the exchange rate, the slope of yield curve, and the flow of credit through their economies. A growing number of central banks have gradually introduced a set of new monetary policy measures – that are coined as ‘unconventional monetary policy tools’ – to continue to meet their inflation mandate (Table 1).    These tools came under the general headings of: negative interest rate policies; lending operations to banks; large scale asset purchase programmes (otherwise known as ‘quantitative easing’); and forward guidance (telling people what the central bank intends to do and for how long).             
 8    Table 1: Summary of unconventional monetary policy interventions (Date of first implementation in parenthesis)  Negative interest rates Term lending  Asset purchase programmes Forward guidance ECB  (2014)  (2011)   (2009)   (2013) United Kingdom    (2008)   (2009)   (2013) United States     (2008)   (2008) Japan   (2016)   (2010)   (2009)  (1999) Switzerland   (2015)   (2009)  (2009)  Sweden           (2009)    (2015)  (2009) Denmark  (2012)    Canada     (2008) Sources: BIS (2019), Unconventional monetary policy issues: a cross-country analysis, CGFS Papers, No 63; and relevant central banks.  The selection of the particular instruments was dependent on each countries’ issues (i.e., were they aiming to boost demand and/or manage a specific market disruption) and their financial market structure (e.g., what assets are on offer to purchase).   For example, the Bank of International Settlements (BIS) report that around 18 asset purchase programmes were initiated by central banks between 2009 and 2016.8 Central banks bought a host of public and private sector bonds, specific agency mortgage backed securities, and other ‘asset backed’ securities (Table 2). They did so to swap central bank cash for other peoples’ assets, thereby generating liquidity and lowering interest rates.                                                                 8 BIS (2019). ‘Unconventional monetary policy issues: a cross-country analysis’, CGFS Papers, No 63, October 2019. 
 9   Table 2: Large-scale asset purchases by type (as % of GDP)  Type of assets purchased Government bonds1 Mortgage-backed securities2 Corporate bonds Equities Euro area 20 (27) 2 1  Japan 65 (44)  1 5 Sweden 7 (41)    United Kingdom 27 (33)  1  United States 15 (20) 14   1 Numbers in parentheses are the maximum share of government bonds outstanding that the central bank held. 2 The ECB purchased covered bonds; the Fed purchased RMBS and agency debt. Sources: BIS (2019), Unconventional monetary policy issues: a cross-country analysis, CGFS Papers, No 63; and Gagnon and Sack (2018), QE: A User's Guide, Peterson Institute Policy Brief, PB18-19.   The key outcomes were that interest rates on government bonds and corporate debt instruments did decline, stimulating spending. There was also a smaller, but positive, impact on credit availability.  Monetary policy has been effective at stimulating economic activity even when the effective lower bound on interest rates has been met.9    Being prepared at Te Pūtea Matua  At present inflation in New Zealand is near the mid-point of our target range of 1 to 3 percent annual CPI inflation.  The level of employment is also at, if not slightly above, our estimate of the maximum sustainable level.  Achieving these targets has in large part been down to our setting of the OCR at 1.0 percent, well below our estimate of the ‘neutral rate’ of around 3 percent.    In our February Monetary Policy Statement we also outlined our thoughts for the economy ahead, noting good economic support from both monetary and fiscal policy, household wealth and spending, and New Zealand’s strong terms of trade.10   Of course, we also remain humble as to our ability to predict the future, and I reiterate that on the basis of our historical forecast errors, the chance that the short-term interest rate in                                                            9 Ibid. The BIS study found that “central banks judged that negative policy rates contributed to the achievement of their policy goals”, albeit “transmission effects could be weaker … should more deeply negative rates be implemented”. 10 Monetary Policy Statement Feb 2020, https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/monetary-policy/monetary-policy-statement/mps-february-2020  
 10   New Zealand could be 1 percent lower than now in two years’ time is around 20 percent.  That means while an effective zero bound for interest rate is far from the most likely outcome in New Zealand, it can’t be ruled out.  This is not a prediction, just a statistical observation outlining the challenges of setting monetary policy.   An inability to predict what might happen next is no excuse for not preparing for what could happen. That’s true for businesses, governments and central banks. It is in light of both economic theory and recent global experience that we have been assessing what alternative monetary policy tools may be available to the Reserve Bank of New Zealand – and their relative desirability.  We are fortunate, unlike many other OECD economies, to have the time to prepare for such possible needs.   The work we have been pursuing has involved: • Identifying the suite of possible ‘unconventional monetary policy tools’ available to us; • Defining and making explicit the criteria we would assess these tools with, against both each other and also alternative policies all together (e.g., fiscal policy options); • Considering the relative benefits and costs of the tools, so as to operate on a ‘least surprise’ basis, and to ensure we are working in collaboration and with the agreement of the fiscal authorities; • Considering not just the monetary policy efficacy of the tools, but also broader considerations related to our financial stability and efficiency mandate; and • Ensuring the tools are actually able to be utilised, including working with the important financial institutions that make up our system.  Recent international experience  Our work, outlined later, has been informed by much research and recent experience internationally, which has highlighted desirable and less desirable (sometimes unanticipated) outcomes.   There are consequences of using monetary policy – conventional and unconventional – with different impacts on different people (e.g., savers versus borrowers).  These consequences can become more significant the longer interest rates remain low.  Evidence on the side-effects of unconventional monetary policy is emerging slowly and is sometimes inconclusive.  What is certain is that the use of unconventional policy puts the spotlight on the central bank.    First, there are implementation questions around the selection of tools and their use.  For example, large scale asset purchases introduce the central bank into more targeted ‘picking winners’ compared to the blunt interest rate instrument. We need to assess which assets are up for sale to the central bank and why.  Borrowers and savers continue to be impacted differently as per conventional monetary policy, however the choice of which assets to purchase significantly impacts specific parts of the financial markets and sectors of society.    The selection criteria for specific assets also needs to be clear. There is a choice to be made between public or private assets, and then which assets. As an example, there has recently been increasing discussion of favouring ‘green’ bonds over other bonds.  
 11   Second, central banks have also recently bought assets that have a long duration.  Even if they stopped now, the assets will sit on the central bank balance sheets for a long time to come unless sold before maturity. Some of the assets may become impaired while the central bank owns them, creating market and credit risk for the central banks’ balance sheets.   Third, central bank balance sheets (which are effectively the government’s balance sheet) have expanded greatly with the purchased assets and issued liabilities (see Table 2 for the scale of central bank asset purchases as a proportion of GDP). The persistence of these purchase programmes has also been far longer than anticipated at their outset, given the ongoing low inflation pressures.  The marginal impact on interest rates of new purchases is now reducing in some countries.   Fourth, while targeted direct intervention is often positive for specific market functioning, the unprecedented growth in central banks’ balance sheets can also have unintended detrimental impacts.11 Some challenging factors include the scarcity of bonds available for investors to buy, squeezed liquidity in some asset markets, and fewer market operators actively trading.   Fifth, a possibly unsurprising outcome of persistently low global interest rates and the use of unconventional monetary policy tools has been rising asset prices. This outcome has meant increased wealth for some, e.g., home owners and equity investors (Figure 5).   Figure 5: Global asset prices   Source: OECD, Real Estate Institute of New Zealand, RBNZ. Note: House prices for OECD members serve as a proxy for advanced economies.                                                             11 BIS (2019). ‘Large central bank balance sheets and market functioning’. Market Committee Papers, October 2019. 5010015020025030050100150200250300IndexIndexNew ZealandAdvanced economiesChinaSharesHouses201520112019201120152019
 12   However, the overall impact of unconventional monetary policy on wider wealth and income equality is currently unclear. Some studies find that unconventional monetary policy, particularly large scale asset purchases, increase inequality more significantly than conventional monetary policy.12  Other studies find the unconventional policies have had a limited or positive impact on reducing income inequality, e.g., by supporting the income of low income families by supporting employment.13 These possible effects need to be considered in the context of broader fiscal policy settings.  Finally, there has been significant spill-over effects to other smaller open economies including New Zealand.  This is primarily driven by inward capital flows as investors search for higher yields around the globe.  These capital inflows have led global bond yields lower – including in New Zealand.    The low imported interest rates have necessitated a variety of economic policy responses across many countries – including the lowering of central bank policy rates to stem the inflow, introducing macroprudential tools aimed at curbing excess lending, and purchasing foreign assets to slow down upward pressure on domestic currency values.    At Te Pūtea Matua we have undertaken the first two of these responses so as to continue to meet our inflation and employment mandate, as well as mitigate the risks of excessive debt/lending on broader financial stability (e.g., the introduction and use of our Loan-to-Value Ratios).14  The set of choices for Te Pūtea Matua  The Reserve Bank team is using international and domestic experience to assess the full suite of monetary policy tools available to New Zealand.  Today we published a short document that outlines the framework we would follow if we had to use unconventional monetary policy tools.15  Publishing this framework provides greater transparency about how we might use these tools.   This work is about being prepared for any range of potential eventualities, it is not a prediction of whether additional monetary policy tools will be needed. Table 3 outlines the principles we would use to guide the use of the tools.                                                                 12 For example, Evgendis, A., & Fasianos, A. (2019). ‘Monetary policy and wealth inequality in Great Britain: Assessing the role of unconventional policies for a decade of household data’. arXiv:1912.09702. 13 Colciago, A., Samarina, A. & de Hann, J. (2019). ‘Central bank policies and income and wealth inequality: a survey’. Journal of Economic Surveys, 0(0), 1-33. 14 RBNZ webpage on the use of loan-to-value restrictions, https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/regulation-and-supervision/banks/macro-prudential-policy/loan-to-valuation-ratio-restrictions  15 RBNZ (2020). ‘Principles for Using Unconventional Monetary Policy in New Zealand’, https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/monetary-policy/unconventional-monetary-policy  
 13   Table 3: Principles for using unconventional monetary policy MPC Remit principles Effectiveness Tools would be designed to provide a strong influence over inflation and employment, to ensure that the monetary policy objectives are achieved. Efficiency The Committee would take into account the distortionary impact of the tools on the efficient allocation of resources within the economy, including between various groups and sectors of the economy. Financial system soundness The Committee would take into account the impact of the tools on financial system risks, to avoid the costs of financial crises.  Operational principles Public balance sheet risk The Committee would take into account the financial risks that the tools would create for the Reserve Bank and Crown balance sheets, to protect public funds and central bank independence. Operational readiness Use of the tools would take into account the operational readiness of each tool, to ensure the transmission channels function as expected. This includes the readiness of the Reserve Bank to implement each tool and the readiness of financial markets and the New Zealand public to respond appropriately to the tools.  Source: RBNZ.    Table 4 provides short descriptions of the tools themselves. Our assessments are based on our own knowledge of the workings of New Zealand’s financial markets, as well as international experience and academic insight.   We will provide our full analysis of each of these tools against the principles we hold in coming weeks – so that people can fully understand our thinking and, of course, provide input.               
 14   Table 4: Unconventional monetary policy tools under consideration  Tools Description Forward guidance This would differ from our current approach of publishing our OCR forecast. It may involve publishing a forecast of the shadow short rate, which shows the combined stimulus from the OCR and other monetary policy tools through interest rates. It could also involve the MPC announcing a commitment to keep monetary policy expansionary, in order to hit our monetary policy targets in the medium term, even if the MPC expect this to eventually push inflation above 2% or employment above its sustainable level.  Negative OCR Reduction of the OCR to the effective lower bound (the point at which further OCR cuts become ineffective), which may be below zero. The Reserve Bank could consider changes to the cash system to mitigate cash hoarding if lower deposit rates led to significant hoarding. Interest rate swaps  An interest rate swap is a contract where one stream of future interest payments is exchanged for another. The Reserve Bank could enter into interest rate swaps to reinforce forward guidance. We would receive fixed rates and pay floating rates to financial market participants. This would reduce market interest rates.  Large Scale Asset Purchases (LSAPs) The Reserve Bank could purchase domestic government bonds to lower interest rates and contribute to a flattening of the yield curve through the main channels of policy signalling and portfolio balancing. Unlike the OCR, LSAPs would have more of an effect on longer-term interest rates (2+ years), which are important for mortgage and business lending. Foreign asset purchases The purchase of foreign currency or assets to reduce the NZD exchange rate and, if desired, to increase NZD liquidity. This could include the systematic purchase of foreign assets or buying fixed quantities on set dates. Term lending The provision of collateralised long-term loans to banks in order to support monetary policy transmission through the banking sector. The loans could be provided with conditions that require banks to increase their credit supply. Source: RBNZ.   The monetary policy tools considered all vary as to their effectiveness, efficiency and impact on financial soundness.  They are also at various stages of readiness to be utilised.   Perhaps one of the simplest means of outlining why the tools have various levels of usefulness is to refer back to our discussion on the transmission of monetary policy from shifting the OCR to influencing inflation and employment. Figure 6 expands on this transmission framework by adding in some new tools – namely forward guidance, interest rate swaps, term lending, and large scale asset purchase programmes (of domestic or foreign assets).  The end outcomes are similar in intent, but vary through the channels of the financial system with different degrees of impact.   
 15   Figure 6: The channels through which monetary policy tools affect inflation and employment (This diagram shows the different channels through which different tools ultimately end up affecting inflation and employment. It builds on the monetary policy transmission mechanism shown in the Monetary Policy Handbook (p52))  Source: RBNZ.   
 16   In light of recent international experience, some of the key considerations we now have are:  • What is the optimal sequencing of these tools if monetary policy is increasingly called upon to stimulate the economy?    We are near ready to be able to implement a zero or slightly negative interest rates in our operations, and forward guidance around our future actions is standard practice for us.  But we also must decide at what point we use additional tools and in what order.   • What agreement is needed between the Treasury and the Reserve Bank with regard to the use of our balance sheet, and is it materially different to how we manage it now?   We are currently working with the Treasury to finalise the institutional arrangements that will enable us to effectively use all of the described unconventional monetary policy tools, if they are ever required. This includes the arrangements for handling the balance sheet implications of unconventional tools. More fundamentally, we also need to ensure we can coordinate an appropriate mix of fiscal and monetary policy responses if so desired.    • What additional policy responses might we need to consider to manage some of the consequences of low interest rates and market functioning?    We could consider additional macroprudential tools and specific market interventions to ensure liquidity and credit flows. But we need to assess how best we communicate to all participating in the New Zealand economy as to the purpose of our actions, and our desired outcomes.   New Zealanders have become used to the terminology associated with our current monetary policy activities. A low OCR is understood for its intent and implications on borrowing and lending rates and, in part, the level of the NZ dollar exchange rate.  We need to outline how we could best translate activity in, for example, the interest rate swap market or asset purchases, into meaningful concepts for all.  We need a meaningful ‘shadow’ OCR concept for ease of discussion.  To ensure they operate effectively and efficiently, we also want to ensure market participants (e.g. banks and payments operators) can respond appropriately to the use of unconventional monetary policy tools. While we have done a lot of this preparatory work, we have more to do.   These considerations are all well advanced, and we continue to speak with relevant decision makers, market participants, and technical experts over time.   Any deployment of unconventional monetary policy tools will depend on the prevailing economic conditions, the functioning of the financial system, and the efficiency of the various monetary policy channels. This leads us to currently favour a baseline decision set for the purposes of cyclical demand management, assuming it is needed and superior to alternative policy responses, of:  
 17   • Lowering the OCR; • Using forward guidance; • Using mildly negative interest rates if more stimulus was needed; • Considering the use of interest rate swaps to reduce interest rates for New Zealanders, • Considering asset purchases (e.g., government bonds) for further impact; and • Utilising a combination of all of the above, as needed.  We could also introduce term lending activities if the above combined actions proved insufficient and if retail banks are not passing on the very low rates to customers. Foreign asset purchases could also be useful if a specific economic shock was from offshore and resulted in an overvalued NZ dollar.   The underlying principle is that we would choose the most appropriate tool or combination of tools, and policy coordination, for the situation at hand. For example, if an economic disturbance resulted in significant disruption to the functioning of the financial system, this would naturally alter the stylised ordering outlined above.   Over reliance on one tool  “Give a man a hammer and everything becomes a nail”. Just as for building, economic policy needs the right tools for the job and no one tool can do everything.   All of the conventional and unconventional monetary policy interventions discussed will be more effective when coordinated with supporting whole-of-government intervention activities.  Changes in government consumption and investment, the use of automatic stabilisers, welfare transfers, and varying tax rates all have cyclical as well as structural/permanent impacts on economic activity in a modern economy. This simple observation appears to be one of the most ignored factors globally in recent economic history.   A government’s fiscal policies can deliver similar outcomes for short-term inflation and employment as to monetary policy. However, fiscal retrenchment occurring simultaneously with monetary expansion is akin to one foot on the brake, the other on the accelerator. At times this makes economic sense, but not all of the time.   If a government’s fiscal credibility is low, then investors may be more comfortable with a government focusing purely on debt reduction and fiscal restraint.  However, if a government’s debt is low, and there are significant long-term benefits to spending and/or investing, then a more expansionary fiscal stance can make sense.  Here in New Zealand, for example, the Government recently opted to increase and bring forward its infrastructure investment.16  This action has supported monetary policy in meeting its mandate, increasing activity and employment.   The nature of the economic shock that authorities may be looking to mitigate will inform the choice of tools.  A specific supply shock (where goods and services cannot be produced for                                                            16 Budget Policy Statement 2020, https://budget.govt.nz/budget/2020/bps/delivering-for-nz-infrastructure.htm  
 18   some reason) may be better managed through fiscal support (both automatic stabilisers and/or targeted intervention), with monetary policy assisting rather than leading.  New Zealand’s current drought conditions in regions of the North Island provide an example of a supply shock.  If the drought remains relatively region-specific, and/or short-lived, then monetary policy would have a very limited stabilisation role. Any resulting loss of production may be short-term, and automatic fiscal stabilisers and/or targeted government transfers and spending would be more effective at mitigating any broader economic disruption.  Meanwhile, monetary policy would remain focused on any longer-term impacts on incomes and wealth, and hence inflation and employment pressures.     A similar set of considerations confronts policymakers globally at present with the spread of the Covid-19 virus.  The eventual economic impact on global supply and demand will depend on the location, severity, and duration of the virus.  The optimal mix of policy responses are driven by these same factors.   The severity in terms of disruption to economic activity depends on how the virus is contained and controlled, how long this will persist, and the collective response of governments, officials, consumers, and investors to these events.   The Reserve Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee will be picking through these supply and demand issues.  We will need to account for international monetary and fiscal responses, financial market price changes (e.g., the exchange rate and yield curve), and domestic fiscal responses and intentions, to inform our response. We also remain in regular dialogue with the Treasury to assess how monetary and fiscal policy can be best coordinated.  We need to be considered and realistic as to how effective any potential change in the level of the OCR will be in buffering the New Zealand economy from shocks such as a lack of rainfall and the onset of a virus.    The Reserve Bank is also well practiced in its business continuity roles both for our own team and for our role in the economy.  For example, ongoing business and consumer access to credit and liquidity through the banking system, and ongoing orderly access for New Zealand institutions to global financial markets, are a key focus of our mandate.  We will ensure a stable payment and settlement system, so that money and cash can flow as usual under all circumstances.   For us, these monetary policy and financial stability decisions are repeat processes as the duration and severity of events play out.  We are in a sound starting position with inflation near our target mid-point, employment at its maximum sustainable level, already stimulatory monetary conditions, and a sound financial system.  Conclusion  Monetary policy mandated to maintain stability in the general level of prices and contribute to achieving maximum sustainable employment has proved a success both here and globally over recent decades.  An outcome of the low inflation rates and other structural factors has been unprecedented low nominal interest rates. These circumstances have led to an 
 19   increasing use of alternative monetary policy levers rather than just central banks’ official interest rates.    The use of alternative – unconventional - monetary policy tools has proved successful in general at supporting positive inflation and employment over the post-GFC period across a wide range of economies.  These tools have, however, necessitated new modes of operation and communication. They have also worked through different transmission mechanisms, thus providing varying degrees of effectiveness and some unanticipated outcomes.    The unanticipated outcomes – such as markets functioning differently, asset prices being impacted, and government balance sheets being inflated and exposed to other risks – are understood.  But, these outcomes can become more significant the longer interest rates remain so unprecedentedly low.   The Reserve Bank of New Zealand has not, and still does not, need to use alternative monetary policy instruments to the OCR.  But it is best to be prepared. This speech has outlined the key principles we would use to assess alternative tools available to Bank, and the operational preparations we would need.    We are confident of our success in assessment and implementation, but we are also aware that these tools work best when supported by wider stabilisation policies and additional macroprudential considerations. In the event we ever had to use these unconventional tools, our goal would be to ensure a strong and sustained increase in economic activity, with inflation expectations remaining well-anchored on our target mid-point.    
Stephen S Poloz: Economic progress report - we all have work todoRemarks by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, before”Women in CapitalMarkets”, Toronto, Ontario, 5 March 2020.*   *   *IntroductionThank you for the invitation to be here today. It is particularly fortunate that I am here just beforeInternational Women’s Day to speak with Women in Capital Markets—a group that strives toincrease the participation of women in the finance industry. This is important, and not justbecause you are promoting more equitable outcomes in the sector. It is important because weknow that a more diverse and inclusive workforce leads to better decision making and strongereconomic growth.The Bank of Canada actively shares your goals. Back in 2017, we established the Master’sScholarship Award for Women in Economics and Finance. The aim is to attract and advancewomen in the core areas of our work. The recipients receive a cash scholarship, mentorship witha Bank economist and a job offer. The seven most recent winners were announced last month,along with the winners of Bank scholarships for indigenous students and students withdisabilities. Congratulations to everybody.I am here to explain our decision yesterday to cut interest rates by half a percentage point. Notsurprisingly, the threat to the global economy of COVID-19—the coronavirus—played a centralrole in our deliberations, and we are coordinating actively with other G7 central banks and fiscalauthorities. People are rightfully concerned about the situation, given the human toll the virus istaking and the tragic consequences for those affected. At this stage, the disease is only partlyunderstood. We will count on our public health authorities to give us good advice and contain thesituation in due course.The Bank’s job is to think about how COVID-19 may affect the economy. It has already disruptedthe Chinese economy significantly. This is having ripple effects everywhere because Chineseproducers are highly integrated with the rest of the world through supply chains. As the virusspreads, that disruption may be repeated in many other countries. Of course, travel plans arebeing cancelled, with obvious implications for consumer spending and travel-related business.But there may be more persistent economic effects through eroding consumer and businessconfidence. Indeed, Canadian companies, many of whom had already been forced to thesidelines by uncertainty over the future of NAFTA and the US-China trade war, could retrenchfurther.The Canadian economy has demonstrated good resilience in the past couple of years. Thatresilience could be seriously tested by COVID-19, however, depending on the severity andduration of its effects. So, before I discuss yesterday’s interest rate decision in detail, let mespend a few minutes on the foundation of that resilience—Canada’s strong labour market.Today’s labour marketThe basic story of the Canadian labour market is similar to that of a number of other majoreconomies. Even though unemployment is low, there is a sense of unease among many people.Some worry about being displaced by technology or foreign competition, others about findingstable work in the gig economy.Still, the numbers clearly show that the Canadian labour market is in good health overall. Last 1 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
year, nearly 300,000 jobs were created in Canada. The unemployment rate was below 6 percentthroughout 2019, near its lowest in more than 40 years. Meanwhile, wage growth has increasedfrom around 2 percent to near 3 percent.Importantly, the quality of jobs is also improving. There are a few ways to look at job quality. First,job gains have been concentrated in full-time work. Second, the share of people working part-time involuntarily has shrunk to near the lowest in more than a decade. The Bank will publish acomprehensive staff analytical note in the coming weeks that looks at a wider range of indicatorsof earnings, job security and work-life balance. It shows that job quality has clearly improved inCanada over the past five years.Another sign of labour market health is that many people are changing jobs to get a better matchwith their skills and experience—a process economists call churn. Nationwide, churn is now atlevels last seen more than a decade ago, before the global financial crisis. The latest availabledata show that Canadians who change jobs are seeing their wages rise by 12 to 14 percent.There is little doubt that this job switching is raising productivity in the economy, and the latestdata do indeed show a rising trend in productivity.There is more. It is taking less time on average for unemployed people to find jobs. And there aremore than half a million job vacancies in the economy. This meshes with what I hear frombusiness leaders across the country, who say that their biggest challenge is finding qualifiedpeople to fill existing vacancies.Of course, these are all national statistics, which mask some pretty stark regional variations. Weare well aware of the difficulties facing oil-producing regions, for example. The 50 percent plungein oil prices back in late-2014 contributed to a similar drop in investment spending. Combinedwith ongoing transportation constraints, this boosted Alberta’s unemployment rate, which wasaround 4.5 percent before the oil price shock, to over 9 percent by late 2016, with young menfacing the highest unemployment. The latest jobless rate in Alberta is 7.3 percent. This tells youthat, while the economy is adjusting, it remains a long and difficult process. On the other side ofthe coin, labour markets have been quite tight outside of the prairies, according to our BusinessOutlook Survey. And two of the provinces with the strongest economies, British Columbia andQuebec, also feature the highest job vacancy rates.Another key measure of labour market health is the participation rate. This is the percentage ofworking-age people who are either employed or actively looking for work. A rising participationrate can signal that people who dropped out of the labour force earlier are returning. This is goodfor their own prospects and for the country’s economic potential.Participation rates fell sharply in the wake of the global financial crisis and the slow recovery thatfollowed. At the time, a major preoccupation for the Bank was the possibility that people would beunemployed for so long that their skills would become less valuable—a process economists calllabour market scarring. Fortunately, labour force participation rates have risen in all age groups. This makes the record-low unemployment rates we are seeing doubly impressive, especially given the setbacks wehave had along the way, such as the drop in oil prices. This is not to argue that higher labourforce participation is always a good thing. For seniors, for example, it could mean either that theyare happily extending their working lives or that they need to work longer because they are notfully prepared for retirement.  Still, when you look at all the indicators, you can see that the labour market has been, andcontinues to be, a source of resilience for the Canadian economy. A solid, secure job is theprimary basis for consumer confidence and household spending, which is the primary engine ofgrowth of any economy. 2 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
That said, it is also plain to see that there is still work to do. Sectoral weakness in the Prairieprovinces and in Atlantic Canada remains a concern. On another front, Canada’s populationincludes several groups that have been chronically underemployed, representing significantuntapped potential. In particular, the female participation rate is still about 8 percentage pointsless than the male rate. And the Indigenous participation rate is well below that of the generalpopulation.Helping new immigrants enter the workforce is another potential growth area. As our workforceages, we are generating barely enough new workers to replace retiring baby boomers, soimmigration is key to our future economic growth. Looking underneath this trend, unemploymentrates for immigrants after 5 to 10 years is about the same as for the general population.However, in those first five years, the unemployment rate of new immigrants is higher thanaverage, probably due to barriers around education equivalency.Improving labour market healthGiven the importance of labour market health to our economic resilience, it is natural to askwhether there are policies available to strengthen it further. For its part, the Bank of Canada’s roleis to continue with a monetary policy anchored on inflation control. By acting in a way to keepinflation on target, we help to stabilize economic growth and keep the economy near its potential.This in turn means that the economy delivers the most jobs and income that it can withoutcreating faster inflation.For example, consider the experience of 2015. We knew that the collapse of oil prices would leadto a large drop in income and investment for the entire economy and cause inflation to headbelow target. As a consequence, we cut interest rates immediately, without waiting for theadverse effects to appear. Lower interest rates helped bring inflation closer to target and helpedthe economy as a whole return more quickly to full capacity and full employment.  This adjustment process sounds very simple in abstract. But behind that economic theory weare talking about real people. For those directly involved, adjustment can be very difficult andpainful. What is more, the situation forces individuals to take on all the related risks.Consider someone working in the energy sector who lost their job when oil prices collapsed.Even if they can find suitable work in another province, they may have a spouse who is reluctantto leave a good job and children who are settled in their school and community. They may needto sell their house, which could be difficult if the local real estate market has slowed. Houses inthe new location may be more expensive or difficult to find. It is not easy to face these risks andovercome these barriers. That is why the adjustment process takes a long time.In 2015, these adjustments were facilitated by lower interest rates and a depreciation of theCanadian dollar. Obviously, more targeted labour market policies lie beyond the Bank’s purview.Still, it makes sense for policymakers to address impediments that make it hard for workers tobe matched up with those half-million job vacancies. There may be new ways of helping peopledeal with the risks involved in relocation, or overcome regional barriers to job matching. Forexample, there may be areas where we could make it easier for skilled workers andprofessionals to recertify to qualify for a job in a different province. We may also be able to learnfrom international experience in terms of improving our educational, training and retrainingprograms.I mentioned earlier that, despite low unemployment, people express a sense of dissatisfactionand unease about their future. It is possible that the distribution of income is contributing to this.Total labour income as a share of the Canadian economy began to trend downward nearly 30years ago and has remained in a lower range for the past 10–15 years. Opportunities forglobalization of supply chains and the steady increase in automation technology have no doubtreduced employee bargaining power over time, not to mention declining union membership. 3 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
Bearing in mind that globalization and automation also generate economic growth that benefitseveryone, it is clear that there is no simple solution to this. However, it is a useful metric to trackwhen considering alternative policy ideas.  Yesterday’s decisionAll that said, the Canadian labour market has certainly been important to the economy’sresilience. Its strength has helped support the growth in incomes and household consumptionthat we have seen. However, it is just one factor that the Bank’s Governing Council looks at whenwe sit down to take our monetary policy decisions. Let me turn now to yesterday’sannouncement.It is important that we put recent developments into proper context. Business investment hasbeen falling short of expectations in Canada for the past three years. Six months ago, we wereseeing signs that the US–China trade war was beginning to affect Canadian exports andinvestment even further. In October, we pointed to Canada’s two-track economy, where softexports and investment were being offset by a recovering housing sector, a strong labour marketand solid consumer spending. But we were concerned that the effects of the trade war couldeventually tilt the balance of risks against us. With the economy operating very close to itspotential, the unemployment rate near historic lows and inflation on target, Governing Counciljudged that the risk that growth would slow was not great enough to warrant a cut in interestrates. The main reason was that lower interest rates could reduce the downside risk to growthbut could at the same time increase financial vulnerabilities. And this would make it harder toachieve the inflation target in the future.In January, the conditions had changed but the reasoning behind our decision was similar.Consumer confidence declined in late 2019, but there seemed to be a reasonable chance thatthis would prove temporary. Furthermore, there were signs that the global economy wasbottoming out, and there was a growing consensus that world economic growth would edgehigher in 2020. Accordingly, we again acknowledged that there were downside risks to theCanadian economy. But, with the labour market in a very solid situation, we felt that the downsiderisk was not sufficient to warrant lower interest rates.A lot has happened in the past six weeks. In particular, the global economy will, at the very least,be significantly disrupted by COVID-19 in the first half of the year. It is possible that the globaleconomy will snap back quickly after health professionals have managed the situation andconditions have returned to normal. However, the outbreak and its effects could be morepersistent. Consumer and business confidence could be set back for a longer period of time,causing economic growth to slow more persistently. This could include longer-term layoffs, forexample. At this point, we simply do not know.Of course, the coronavirus is not the only issue on the table. Just last week, we received thedetailed economic report on the fourth quarter of 2019 from Statistics Canada. As expected, thisreport shows that the economy slowed significantly in late 2019. Some of this was due to specialfactors, such as an early winter that left some crops to rot in the fields, the Canadian NationalRailway strike, the shutdown of the General Motors plant in Oshawa and so on. Still, economicgrowth in the fourth quarter was lower than 1 percent when you take out the effect of the specialfactors. This is because some of the slowdown was more structural—exports remained weak,business investment declined and the recovery in housing moderated.The one positive was consumer spending, which remained solid even while the savings ratewent up further. Consumer confidence did rebound in January, as we had hoped. In short, thesolid labour market we discussed earlier is giving the economy a measure of resilience.What about the start of 2020? In addition to the impact of COVID-19, there are other factors: thestrike by Ontario teachers, unusual weather and the rail blockades. We can hope that all of these 4 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
factors prove to be temporary, but it seems that we are headed for at least another quarter ofvery slow economic growth. Since it is already March, these factors could easily affect thesecond quarter. There is a real risk that business and consumer confidence will erode further,creating a more persistent slowdown, especially given recent declines in stock markets.Furthermore, world prices of commodities have dropped by more than 10 percent and oil pricesby close to 20 percent since the start of the year. Commodity prices are a very important channelfor transmitting international shocks to the Canadian economy. With the oil-producing regions ofour economy already stressed, this shock can only deepen and prolong the adjustment processdiscussed earlier. And the effects go beyond oil. These stresses will inevitably find their way fromcommodity-producing regions into other parts of the country as those who are affected directlyspend less money on everything.In light of all these developments, the Canadian outlook is clearly weaker now than it was inJanuary. When the economy is operating close to its potential and inflation is on target, a risk-management approach to monetary policy often recommends unchanged policy in the face of asmall shock. However, risk management demands a prompt and sizable policy response tolarger shocks to ensure that the economy remains well anchored. Governing Council agreed thatthe downside risks to the economy today are more than sufficient to outweigh our continuingconcern about financial vulnerabilities. Indeed, declining consumer confidence would naturallylead to reduced activity in the housing market. In this context, lower interest rates will actuallyhelp to stabilize the housing market, rather than contribute to froth. Further, we expect that the B-20 mortgage lending guidelines will continue to improve the quality of the stock of mortgage debt.Many of the implications of COVID-19 lie beyond the influence of monetary policy and authoritiesin Canada and around the world are focused on addressing the situation. For its part, monetarypolicy can contribute by buffering their effects on consumer and business confidence, therebyhelping the economy bridge the situation. This contribution can be especially powerful when theshock is global and the response is coordinated.As the COVID-19 situation evolves, Governing Council stands ready to adjust monetary policyfurther if required to support economic growth and keep inflation on target. While marketscontinue to function well, the Bank will continue to ensure that the Canadian financial system hassufficient liquidity. And we continue to closely monitor economic and financial conditions, in closecoordination with other G7 central banks and fiscal authorities.I would like to thank Erik Ens for his help in preparing this speech. 5 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
John C Williams: Research, policy, and the zero lower boundRemarks by Mr John C Williams, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal ReserveBank of New York, at the Shadow Open Market Committee Spring Meeting, New York City, 6March 2020.*   *   *As prepared for deliveryGood afternoon. I would like to start by thanking Athanasios for inviting me to participate in thisevent. It is a real honor to highlight the influence of our esteemed colleague Marvin Goodfriend, anoutstanding and original researcher, policy advisor, and friend.Marvin epitomized the role of policy advisor. His research dug deep into the issues, introducednew ideas into the discussion, and developed options for policymakers to consider for the mostchallenging issues. The fact that we have so many researchers and policymakers here istestament to the importance of his research in shaping the conversations that we are having tothis day.Before I reflect more on Marvin’s contributions to monetary policy, I should give the standard Feddisclaimer that the views I express today are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those ofthe Federal Open Market Committee or others in the Federal Reserve System.In preparation for what I know will be a stimulating discussion, I’d like to highlight a few of theways that Marvin changed the conversation in the U.S. about what was then commonly referredto as the zero lower bound on interest rates, or ZLB for short. These show how Marvin’s insightsshaped some of the most prominent discussions in monetary policy.Before I do so, it’s helpful to look back about 20 years. As the clock ticked down on the 20thcentury, many people’s attention was not on the ZLB. Most were more concerned about themillennium bug that had the world on high alert.Truth be told, the ZLB wasn’t perceived to be a looming problem in the United States back in1999. The economy was doing very well and the target federal funds rate was 5-1/2 percent atthe end of the year. Up until then, the only historical reference points for the ZLB were from theGreat Depression of the 1930s and, more recently, Japan in the 1990s. It was simply not part ofthe experience of postwar Europe or the Americas.However, a small group of economists, with Marvin at the forefront, was asking whether the ZLBcould pose a challenge here in the U.S. and, if so, what would be the consequences andpotential remedies. Researchers and policymakers began to turn the dial up on the discussionaround the ZLB.The Fed held a conference in Woodstock, Vermont in October 1999 on the ZLB. At thatconference, Marvin presented his paper “Overcoming the Zero Bound on Interest Rate Policy,”which was subsequently published in the Journal of Money, Credit and Banking (JMCB). InJanuary 2002, Marvin briefed the FOMC on aspects of the research that he had presented at theWoodstock conference, as part of a session on the ZLB in which David Reifschneider and Ipresented our research as well. By that point, the federal funds rate had fallen to 1.75 percent,so the ZLB was starting to get on policymakers’ radar screens.On those occasions, Marvin emphasized the importance of the ZLB as a constraint on policy andurged us to think differently about how central banks could still carry out their missions, evenunder that constraint. He developed and analyzed what were then considered “outside the box”options for overcoming the ZLB. These helped lay the groundwork for how economists and123 1 / 2BIS central bankers' speeches
policymakers think about these issues in both conceptual and practical terms.For example, Marvin was one of the first people to think seriously about how the constraintcaused by the ZLB could be relaxed by implementing negative interest rates. Now, I know that thetopic of negative interest rates is controversial. But, whatever conclusions you may draw aboutthe relative merits of negative rates, Marvin’s research early on helped identify and explore abroad dimension of issues and potential choices for policymakers.Marvin’s intellectual pursuit of all aspects of the ZLB logically drove him to explore the possibilityfor currency to have a digital component. Although many think of central bank digital currenciesas a new-fangled idea, Marvin was thinking deeply about the prospect long ago. This hasbecome one of the hot topics in the world of central banks today.The conversation that Marvin began in Woodstock in 1999 became the basis for discussions thatwere had later on at the FOMC meeting in January 2002. At that FOMC meeting, Marvinexpanded upon the idea of asset purchases as a policy tool that he had proposed in his paper atthe conference in Woodstock.He emphasized that the Fed asset purchases can affect financial conditions and thereby theeconomy. He was expanding the conversation away from thinking about conventional monetarypolicy to unconventional options, like the balance sheet. Importantly, he distinguished betweencentral bank purchases of short-term government securities, as the Bank of Japan was doing atthat time, versus purchases of longer-term securities. Marvin viewed purchases of short-termsecurities as ineffective under the ZLB, while he saw purchases of longer-duration securities aspotentially powerful owing to a “preferred habitat” motive on the part of investors. Of course,large-scale asset purchases later became a tool of critical importance for easing financialconditions in the United States and abroad.Although the consequences of the predicted Y2K glitch were minimal, the ZLB became a centralissue when the financial crisis hit. Thankfully, Marvin, along with others, helped lay the intellectualgroundwork and created the vocabulary for us to work through some of the most significantissues facing central banks. His work is a true emblem of how researchers play a vital role ininforming and shaping the policy discussion.I look forward to the upcoming conversation. Thank you.Jeffrey C. Fuhrer and Mark S. Sniderman, Conference Summary, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Volume32, Number 4, Part 2, pp. 845–69, November 2000.Marvin Goodfriend, Overcoming the Zero Bound on Interest Rate Policy, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,Volume 32, Number 4, Part 2, pp. 1007–35, November 2000.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meetingand presentation materials, January 29–30, 2002.123 2 / 2BIS central bankers' speeches
Masayoshi Amamiya: Central Bank Digital Currency and the futureof payment and settlement systemsRemarks by Mr Masayoshi Amamiya, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Future ofPayments Forum, Tokyo, 27 February 2020.*   *   *IntroductionI would like to thank all of you for attending the Future of Payments Forum today.Recent private sector initiatives, including stablecoins, indicate the customers’ need forconvenient, fast and efficient payments. To meet this need, the central bank should cooperatewith the private sector and continue to improve the payment and settlement infrastructures itoffers. In this regard, the question as to whether the central bank should issue digital currency(CBDC) or not has become an important issue.When we look into how we should picture the future of payment and settlement infrastructures inJapan, in a digital society, it is important to consider in what forms the central bank shouldprovide central bank money, and how to improve the private sector’s payment services. Thesetwo issues are closely related and should not be examined separately. I sincerely hope that wewill have a fruitful exchange of views, as we have so many experts here today at the Future ofPayments Forum.When addressing these issues, it is important to explore how IT innovations and private sectorinitiatives could impact the payment and settlement systems and the architecture of money. Toinitiate our discussion, I would first like to touch upon “what will remain unchanged” and “what willchange” in the foreseeable future.What Will Remain UnchangedThere are three things that will not change or should not be changed regarding the payment andsettlement systems, and money.First, the basic architecture of money will remain unchanged. There are two forms of money:token-based or account-based. Token-based money is a form of money in which monetary valueis locally stored in some kind of media. Cash and electronic money issued by Japanesetransport companies are examples. There is a difference in the type of media in which monetaryvalue is stored, i.e. paper and electronic devices, but the basic architecture remains the samewhere payments are made by transferring the monetary value stored in that media. Meanwhile,the transfer of value of an account-based money occurs when the issuer debits the account ofthe payer and credits the account of the payee, upon receiving the value transfer instruction fromthe payer. A typical example of account-based money is bank deposits. There are a number ofways for a payer to send a bank transfer instruction to his or her bank, such as via bank tellercounters, internet banking, credit and debit cards, but the basic architecture remains the same.Nonbank payment service providers (NBPSPs), who are leading today’s expansion of thecashless society in Japan, also issue account-based money. Users send them value transferinstructions against their accounts via smartphones to make payments. The future paymentservices will likely develop based on either of these two forms: token-based money or account-based money.Second, the two-tiered monetary system will remain unchanged. This is something that shouldnot be changed and should be maintained. The two-tiered system is a system where the centralbank exclusively supplies central bank money consisting of cash and central bank deposits, and 1 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
private banks provide deposits through credit creation based on the central bank money. Underthe two-tiered system, financial resources are efficiently distributed through private-led initiatives,and the system has the advantage of fully utilizing the private innovation in payment services.Indeed, money issued by NBPSPs, such as Fintech firms, whether token-based or account-based, is created through the equivalent conversion of cash or bank deposits. The existence of alarge number of private money issuers will maintain the benefits of competition in the provision ofnew and efficient means of payments, and in general, of financial services.Third, the fundamental roles of the central bank will remain unchanged. Even if the use of banknotes were to continue to decline and the Japanese economy became cashless, the centralbank would conduct monetary policy under the two-tiered monetary system by controlling centralbank current accounts, which is digital money, and act as the “lender of last resort.” The centralbank may face challenges, such as monetary transmission channels becoming more complexor getting a grasp of money becoming more difficult. However, these challenges are not new tous. The central bank’s responsibilities and ability to maintain monetary and financial stability willbasically be maintained, regardless of the kinds of changes that take place in the environmentsurrounding payment services and money as IT innovations advance.What Will ChangeBy contrast, how will the payment and settlement systems evolve along with IT innovations?Now, I would like to touch upon three things that will change, and which will be relevant to mylater remarks.First, cashless payments will steadily expand in retail payments. In fact, the outstanding amountof cash in circulation has been increasing in major advanced economies, except in specialcases such as Sweden. In Japan, people using cashless payments seem to have increasedsince the introduction of the “Point Reward Project for Consumers using Cashless Payment” bythe government in October 2019. However, at the same time, the outstanding amount of cash incirculation has also increased by two percent annually. The preference for cash remainssurprisingly strong. Having said that, with the emergence of new services and greater awarenessof their convenience, the move toward the cashless society will not be hampered in the long run.Second, diversification of payment service providers is likely to continue. A recent developmentof the cashless society seems to be led by NBPSPs such as Bigtechs, Fintechs, retailers andtransport companies, rather than banks. For example, funds transfer service providers, typicallynamed “XYZ Pay,” and prepaid payment instruments issuers, such as retailers and transportcompanies, issue digital money that differs from traditional cash and bank deposits, and the useof such digital money seems to be expanding. Diversification of payment service providers willlikely have various impacts on financial regulations as well as the operations of payment andsettlement systems operated or managed by the central bank and the private sector.Third, money and data will become more closely linked. Many NBPSPs provide convenientcashless payment services. Their aim is not only to improve the convenience of customers, butalso to seek to expand their own ecosystem via network effects by inducing customers to useother relevant businesses NBPSPs offer. This strategy is called “Data-Network-Activity (DNA).”In the past, making payments for purchases, in other words, using money, meant an exchangeof certain amount of economic value. Nowadays, it also means an exchange of relevant data onwho has purchased what, when and where. In some cases, the exchanged data could be datathat the web advertisement has just been viewed, but nothing has been purchased. Therefore,when we explore the future of the payment and settlement systems, it becomes more vital todiscuss issues concerning the protection and effective use of personal data.CBDC Discussion in Foreign Central BanksIn a world where the environment surrounding the payment and settlement systems and money 2 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
has been rapidly changing, what roles and functions will be expected for CBDC? Foreign centralbanks investigating the issuance of CBDC could be put into three groups.The first is the case of Sweden. In Sweden, decrease in the outstanding amount of cash incirculation, having reached less than two percent of GDP, is behind their motivation to explorethe possibility of the issuance of CBDC. As a result of a significant growth in cashless payments,the number of retail stores accepting cash has decreased, and people are sometimes facingdifficulties doing their daily shopping by cash. Under these circumstances, the central bank isaiming to provide all the people with access to central bank money.The second is the case of emerging economies, such as Cambodia and the Bahamas. In theseeconomies, infrastructures related to domestic currency and payments have remainedimmature, but smartphones have spread everywhere. In such an environment, rebuilding thepayment and settlement systems from scratch is a viable agenda, and it is easier to adopt thelatest technology.The third is the case of China. Though details of the design are as yet unknown, according toinformation officially released up to now, the People’s Bank of China (PBoC) clearly aims atissuing CBDC as a substitute for cash in circulation. The PBoC will not only focus on thereduction of cash handling cost but also on addressing the risks of counterfeiting, as well aspreventing money laundering and countering the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT).The situation is different in major advanced economies, including Japan. The need for CBDC isnot necessarily increasing, as observed in the aforementioned countries. In many advancedeconomies, the outstanding amount of cash in circulation is still growing annually. At this point,there is no need to implement new steps to ensure people’s access to central bank money.Moreover, the currency systems and the payment and settlement systems of these economiesare operating safely and stably. They cannot simply jump into new technologies, or actually, theyshould not. AML/CFT is an important issue, but the most advanced economies consider that theyshould first be addressed through regulatory and supervisory measures.Issues regarding CBDCWhat, then, will be the roles and functions expected for CBDC, other than those discussed inthese cases? To respond to this question, it might be beneficial to review the fundamental rolesof the currency. In this way, not only potential benefits of CBDC, but also various issues thatneed to be addressed will come to light.To support economic activities, it is essential to have payment instruments that are safe, reliable,cheap and universal to everyone. Most would agree that the central bank should play the role ofprovider of such instruments even in the digital society. CBDC is expected to play a part in this. Iwould like to share one of the views often expressed by payment service providers.As mentioned earlier, the entry of new service providers into the payments market is one of thekey changes in the payment systems arena. In this sense, ensuring the interoperability betweenprivate digital money is a challenge. For example, payment platforms operated by NBPSPs, suchas “XYZ Pay” do not necessarily share member merchants. In other words, it is often the casethat a digital money issued by a NBPSP cannot be accepted by another NBPSP’s membermerchant. Similarly, person-to-person (P2P) payments or money transfers cannot be executedbetween payment platforms operated by different NBPSPs.What roles is CBDC expected to play in these cases? CBDC can help remove barriers of P2Ppayments and significantly improve the interoperability between different types of private digitalmoney. CBDC can contribute to improving the efficiency of payments by interlinking varioustypes of private digital money. In fact, there seem to be high expectations for CBDC in thisrespect. 3 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
However, the story is not that easy. There are a lot of issues to be considered comprehensivelyregarding CBDC, including its implications on payment and settlement systems and the overallfinancial system. As in the cases mentioned earlier, while the issuance of CBDC couldcontribute to interlinking various types of private digital money, it could also present the risk ofcrowding out the existing private services, such as bank fund transfers. Moreover, if the paymentcost associated with CBDC is much lower than that of private payment services, most of themerchants would prefer to accept payment via CBDC, rather than via the private digital money.The central bank is able to offer services that are cheaper than those offered by private entitiesbecause it bears a certain cost from the perspective of providing public goods, that is, the coreinfrastructure for payment and settlement. Depending on the design and pricing of the coreinfrastructure, the central bank could suppress private business and discourage innovations.In addition, if firms and individuals preferred holding CBDC to bank deposits, this would affectbanks’ funding and the function of financial intermediation, including bank lending. Thus, it couldalter the two-tiered monetary system itself.It should be also noted that, as mentioned earlier, as digitalization progresses, money and datawill become more closely linked. If the central bank issues CBDC, relevant transactioninformation will flow into the central bank. Its implication is not only a matter of protectingpersonal information, but also a matter of what kind of system design is desirable for the societyin order to effectively utilize such commercial information for business purposes.The central bank needs to deepen the understanding of the benefits as well as the challengesand risks of issuing CBDC. Moreover, with regard to challenges and risks, the central bankneeds to solidly consider whether there are effective measures to address these challenges andrisks. There are a wide range of issues.When designing the future of payment and settlement systems, it is important to examine howthe overall function of the systems could be improved by considering the interaction betweencentral bank money and private money. In the previous examples, it is important for the privatesector to improve the interoperability of payments, improve the efficiency of the existing paymentinfrastructure, and eliminate friction in the exchange of digital money. To improve interoperability,for example, interlinking different payment platforms or NBPSPs to participate in banks’payments platform might be an option.Closing RemarksThe issues I have just raised are merely some examples relevant to retail payment services.There are also various case examples and challenges concerning wholesale and cross-borderpayments. In today’s forum, we will hold a session for each of these three topics, retail,wholesale, and cross-border payments. I hope this forum will provide an opportunity to seek outthe views of the experts and explore the future of payment and settlement systems together. Tothis end, the Bank of Japan will continue to host the Future of Payments Forum in the future.Moreover, the Bank of Japan has just established a research team on CBDC within the Paymentand Settlement Systems Department and will conduct further study on various issues throughinformation exchange and discussions with the experts and relevant institutions in Japan, andother central banks.Thank you very much for your kind attention. 4 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
erHubGender Diversity for Policy Making, a Central Banking Perspective - Deputy Governor Sharon Donnery 05 March 2020 Speech Keynote speech delivered via video link at OMFIF Gender Balance Index 2020 launchGood evening, firstly let me apologise for not being able to join you this evening in person.1 As I’m sure you will understand, with the evolving situation with regard to COVID-19, and as a senior leader in the Central Bank of Ireland I am required to stay in Dublin. This is first and foremost a public health issue, and at the Central Bank we are adhering to public health advice and guidance of our Health Service Executive (HSE) and the National Public Health Emergency Team.We are closely monitoring developments related to COVID-19 and continue to assess their impact on the economy and the financial system, as more information becomes available.Now, let me say that it is a pleasure to speak to you on gender diversity in policy making and to provide a central banking perspective. Thank you to Her Excellency Ambassador Colonna for hosting the event. It is, of course, very apt to discuss this important topic at the embassy of a country who so proudly gave the world the ideas of liberty, equality and fraternity. In Delacroix’s famous painting, it is a woman, Liberty, leading the people in pursuit of those ideals.And while the focus tonight is on gender diversity, it is important to recall, going beyond gender is vital. Diversity is not just about the ratio of men and women in the work place. It’s about age, ethnicity, sexual orientation, education, nationality, beliefs and more. As we make progress on gender diversity, we need make sure the rising tide lifts all boats. That the progress we make in gender helps promote diversity more widely. This evening, I will first make the case for diversity, the why. Why we need diverse businesses, policymakers, and boards. Then I will discuss the how, how we can increase gender diversity from a central banking perspective. The why…Let me start with the why. For some the ethical argument is sufficient and for many we don’t need to be reminded of the why. However it is important that we continue to make the case for gender diversity.Diversity can help move us away from groupthink, poor risk assessment and insufficient challenge. And gender diversity needs to be taken into account on many levels, from the decision makers in firms and on boards, to policymakers, to students and to the very data we collect. Coming from a central bank that has a mandate for both financial stability and financial sector supervision, diversity is vital. As a regulator, we actively recognise and promote the need for increased diversity in the firms we regulate.Indeed a lack of diversity at senior levels is associated with some of the problems that contributed to the financial crisis. Issues such as groupthink, insufficient challenge, poorly assessed risk, and problems with culture. These are compelling reasons why organisations and businesses should themselves ensure greater gender diversity at senior level. Evidence shows us that diversity can lead to improved outcomes in terms of governance, decision-making, and productivity.  
Research shows that female participation on bank boards has a positive effect on bank performance once a threshold is reached.Also that the very diversity of the board can mitigate groupthink, bringing a mix of values, beliefs and attitudes.In terms of business, there is evidence on how gender diversity can affect the process and quality of decision making.Studies suggest that a higher female presence in top management could help develop better types of leadership behaviour across organisations – namely people development, setting expectations and rewards, providing role models, and participative decision-making.Furthermore, reducing gender differences between management and staff can enhance worker productivity.Beyond regulation, as central bankers, many of our decisions on monetary policy and on financial stability are made by people with a background in economics. And we know that perspectives differ by gender.  A recent IMF study shows that economists views on issues such as the fairness of the labour market and the desirability of government intervention varies systematically by gender.Different views by gender, were also evident on environmental protection in the same study. Overall, female economists were more likely to support increased environmental protection than their male counterparts.Recent research in Germany shows that the gender of policymakers makes a difference. Using the public provision of childcare as an example, the study shows that municipalities with a higher share of female councillors expand public childcare more quickly.This difference in views is important when it is often economists that are designing policy that affects all households, businesses and lives for today, and crucially, for future generations. But it is not only looking at the policymakers today, we must also be conscious of the policymakers of tomorrow. Speaking last year, President Mary Daly of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, noted that the gender of those entering economics in the US has remained at roughly 30% over the past twenty years.In the UK today, less than 30% of undergraduate economics students are women. Furthermore, economics graduates are also disproportionately privately educated.This highlights the need for a diverse pool of qualified people to fill decision and policy making roles. But it is not only the gender balance in businesses, policymakers and prospective decision makers – we also need to think of data.  As an economist, a central banker, we base our policies and our decisions on evidence, and diversity should be no different. One of the standout books I read last year was “Invisible Women” by Caroline Criado Perez. The book highlights the importance of gender based data to better understand the world around us, how it informs areas from policy or product design, to health trials. Through thought provoking and at times shocking examples; she illustrates the implications of designing policy or products for all, based on data for men.  She shows for example that women in Britain are fifty per cent more likely to be misdiagnosed following a heart attack: heart failure trials mainly use male participants. A key takeaway point for me, was not only the need to fill data gaps but also to reflect on how data is used in policy design. That having more diverse planners, decision makers and policymakers should lead to a world better designed to reflect our population. The How… So how can we get to a place with diverse boards and decision makers, where policy is both designed and challenged in its very design by diverse policymakers, to the very students taking on economics studies. Let me start with what we can do as regulators. In 2017, the Central Bank of Ireland started to publish data on the level of gender diversity at senior levels of regulated firms and 23456789 101112
we have committed to publishing this data on an annual basis.We were the first regulator to publish data on fitness and probity applications with a diversity lens. We analyse the applications received by the Central Bank for pre-approval for senior roles across sectors we regulate, including banking, insurance, asset management, securities and markets, and credit unions, for example.Building on these data, we carried out a review of the approach to diversity policies of regulated firms and introduced requirements for regulated firms subject to our corporate governance code to have diversity policies. We are trying to nudge behaviour towards a new improved norm, by being very clear on what we expect to see in such policies.When we started to collect the data in 2012, the results were poor, where only one in six applications were for female candidates. In our latest report for 2019, which will be published in the coming days the number is 26% or over one in four applicants, and a two percentage point increase since 2018.Underneath the small increase, there are substantial differences in role holders across sectors. For example, over one in four senior role holders in the insurance sector are women, while it is only one in eight in asset management. Beyond sectoral information, we can also see the gender balance, or imbalance in the type of roles that women apply for. The data continues to show a pronounced gender imbalance at board level and in revenue generating roles as opposed to second line of defence roles. For example, female applicants for head of investment roles stands at 13% whereas female applicants for compliance and risk roles stands at 41%.And while we are seeing some progress, there is still a long way to go. We are placing a spotlight on this issue and intend to keep it there. In 2018, as part of a major piece of supervisory work on the mortgage market, the Central Bank also published a report on the ‘Behaviour and Culture of the Irish Retails Banks,’ in which we also conducted diversity and inclusion assessments.And next month we will publish the findings of a diversity and inclusion thematic assessment of the insurance industry along with best practice guidance for the wider industry.It is worth recalling why we, central banks and regulators are doing this. We want to ensure boards have a wide diversity of views. We also consider that lack of diversity is a leading indicator of elevated behaviour and culture risks.Of course diversity goes beyond gender, but it is also within gender, diversity of experiences, diversity of thought, diversity of perspectives. We want the firms we supervise to make good decisions, take considered risks and not succumb to groupthink. The firms we supervise now expect challenge from Central Bank supervisors when there is a lack of diversity at board and management levels. Beyond our role as a regulator, within the Central Bank our strategic focus on diversity and inclusion is reflected in our vision and desired culture.It is explicitly called out in the Central Bank of Ireland’s Strategic Plan 2019-2021. Thinking back to when I joined the Central Bank in 1996, the Bank had no women on the senior management team and not a single female head of division. Today, our senior leadership committee is made up of 40% women, and 46% of our heads of division are female and our overall staff is gender balanced.We have diverse views around the table when we are making policy decisions, reducing groupthink and increasing challenge and debate. There have been many contributing factors to this. 131415161718
In recent years, the Central Bank established a diversity and inclusion working group, which is chaired by my colleague, Deputy Governor Ed Sibley. The group publishes a bi-annual action plan to support our strategic intent which aims to accelerate progress and to help embed diversity and inclusion into our everyday people policies and practices.These range from home working policies to enhance flexibility and work life balance, support around maternity leave for both individuals and managers, to reviewing our recruitment processes aimed at attracting diverse talent to the organisation.We aim to enable the career progression of all our staff. We place huge emphasis on development, training, and further education, supplemented with support, mentoring, and coaching. We publish an annual report on our gender pay gap which now stands at 2.4% in favour of male employees.We also have thriving employee networks that help promote diversity within the Bank.Our senior management participate in these networks, encouraging, guiding and facilitating the improvement in diversity and inclusion. And, as I said one of the issues who are the policymakers of the future and how do we increase diversity in the students taking economics for example. A recent initiative in the United Kingdom #discovereconomics is aiming to change perceptions of economics and what economists really do, with a goal to increase diversity in economics students.In Ireland we are considering these approaches also, talking to universities and other public sector bodies that employ economics graduates, considering how we can promote the study of economics to a wider group of students, a more diverse group that reflects our population.I myself did not have dreams of being a leader the day I joined the Central Bank. I didn’t see women in the leadership roles. As leaders both male and female, we need to encourage our staff and colleagues to make the jump, to reach for the promotion, to stretch ourselves. This is a similar point made in this year’s OMFIF report by my colleague, Deputy Governor Delgado from the Banca de Espana. She advises young women to seize opportunities.As policymakers we need to encourage participation, challenge and debate.  As regulators we need to challenge firms we supervise to ensure diversity and its benefits are on the agenda.As employers we need to create a culture that values difference. We need to think about people starting out in work, going for promotion, returning from maternity leave, changing career paths or future leaders.But of course, let’s never forget that behind all the numbers, the indexes, the data, are individual women and girls each with their own story. __________________________[1] I would like to thank Caroline Mehigan and Micheal O’Keeffe for their assistance in preparing my remarks. [2] See Owen, A.L. and Temesvary, J. 2018, “The performance effects of gender diversity on bank boards”, Journal of Banking and Finance, Vol 90, Issue C, pp. 50-63. [3] See Hoogendoorn, S., Oosterbeek, H. and van Praag, M. 2013, “The impact of gender diversity on the performance of business teams: evidence from a field experiment”. Management Science, 59, pp. 1514–1528.[4] See Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (2012), ‘.’ OECD, Paris.Also, see Daily, C.M., Dalton, D.R. and Cannella, A.A. (2003) ‘Corporate governance: Decades of dialogue and data.’ Academy of management review, 28(3), pp.371-382. Also, see Robinson, G. and Dechant, K. (1997) ‘Building a business case for diversity.’ Academy of Management Executive, 11, pp. 164–177.19202122Closing the Gender Gap: Act Now
[5] See McKinsey & Company (2009)  for results of a global survey of almost 800 business leaders conducted in September 2009.[6] See Giuliano, L., Levine, D. I, and Leonard, J. (2006). ‘Do Race, Age, and Gender Differences Affect Manager-Employee Relations? An Analysis of Quits, Dismissals, and Promotions at a Large Retail Firm.’ UC Berkeley: Institute for Research on Labor and Employment.[7] See May, A M, D Kucera and M G McGarvey (2018), “”, Finance & Development 55(2).[8] See Baskaran, T. and Hessami, Z. 2020, “Women as policymakers do make a difference” Vox, CEPR policy Portal, . [9] Daly, Mary. C. 2018, “Getting from diversity to inclusion in economics” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Economic Letter, 2018-15. [10] President Daly was speaking at a jointly hosted conference between the Bank of England, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and the European Central Bank on gender and career progression. These were held in  and  and one is planned for 2020. [11] See Advani, A., Griffith, R. and Smith, S. 2019 “Economics in the UK has a diversity problem that starts in schools and colleges”, VOX CEPR Policy Portal, 15 October, 2019. [12] See Criado Perez, Caroline, “Invisible Women” Chatto & Windus, London 2019. [13] See Demographic Analysis – Applications for pre-approval controlled functions (PCF) roles in regulated firms 2018.[14] See Demographic Analysis – Applications for pre-approval controlled functions (PCF) roles in regulated firms 2019 (forthcoming). [15] See Behaviour and Culture of the Irish Retail Banks, 2018, Central Bank of Ireland.[16] Ibid.[17] See the Strategic Plan 2019-2021, Central Bank of Ireland. [18] Ibid. [19] See the Gender pay Gap Report, Central Bank of Ireland, 2019. [20] For example, the Women, Parent and Carers network, LGBT+ and Bankability networks.[21] For more information see Discover Economics .  [22] See  Gender Balance Index Report, 2020.‘Women Matter 3: Women leaders, a competitive edge in and after the crisis,’Mind the Gap: Differing perspectives of men and women economists may affect policy outcomes18 February 202020182019hereOMFIF©2020 Central Bank of Ireland
Burkhard Balz: Closing of the EU twinning project for the NationalBank of SerbiaRemarks by Mr Burkhard Balz, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank, atthe closing of the EU twinning project for the National Bank of Serbia, Belgrade, 6 March 2020.*   *   *1 IntroductionGovernor Tabaković, Vice-Governor Ivković, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen,In July 2020, Belgrade will host the “European University Games”, Europe’s largest universitysports event of the year, and one of the largest sporting events ever organised in Serbia.Over 6,000 athletes from all around Europe will display their talent in more than 20 disciplines.They will also have the opportunity to broaden their horizons, get to know other cultures and buildfriendships.And they will have the opportunity to fall in love with Belgrade, this fascinating city at theconfluence of the Sava and Danube rivers.At our event today, there are people from many European countries, too. Admittedly, the numberof participants is somewhat smaller than 6,000. Yet, more importantly, we don´t have to fight fortitles and seconds – instead, we are all winners.I am delighted to celebrate the successful conclusion of the EU twinning project with the NationalBank of Serbia, the Croatian National Bank, the National Bank of Romania and the DeutscheBundesbank. This is something that all the stakeholders can be proud of.2 Central banks, cooperation and EU twinning projectsLadies and gentlemen,Central banks are crucial institutions in modern economies. I am sure, everyone in this roomagrees. After all, central banks ensure that monetary systems function both at the national andinternational level. Most notably, they use monetary policy to keep the value of money stable. Thatsaid, central banks do face a number of challenges. In particular, they have to exercise theirmandate in a political and economic environment of its own. And there is no blueprint for this.Monetary policy is not something that can be sketched out on the drawing board.Incidentally, the same can be said for other central bank tasks, such as banking supervision,financial stability policy and providing the economy with cash and cashless payment facilities.This makes it all the more important for central banks to regularly exchange best practices. TheEU twinning projects are an ideal platform for doing exactly that. They offer the opportunity todiscuss current central banking issues, to learn from one another and develop shared ideas.That is why the Bundesbank did not hesitate in taking part in the EU twinning projects.We carried out our first EU twinning project with the Czech National Bank back in 2004. Sincethen, the Bundesbank has become a strong partner in such EU-funded programmes. We havebeen involved in projects with central banks and supervisory authorities in 14 countries so far.In particular, we have been able to contribute quite specific insights, which we gained from ourown transformation processes, including German reunification and European monetary union.Against this backdrop, we were more than happy to participate in the EU twinning project for the 1 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
National Bank of Serbia.This was facilitated by the fact that the National Bank of Serbia and ESCB central banks havecooperated closely for quite some time now. Starting in 2008, the National Bank of Serbia hasbeen involved in a range of EU-funded ESCB programmes. In addition, there has been a closebilateral cooperation between the National Bank of Serbia and the Bundesbank.For instance, we carry out up to ten bilateral activities on central banking and supervisory topicseach year. And participants from the National Bank of Serbia regularly attend the Bundesbank’sinternational central banking courses.3 EU twinning project for the National Bank of SerbiaLadies and gentlemen,In as early as 2003, the European Council Summit in Thessaloniki made integration of theWestern Balkans a priority of EU expansion. In 2009, Serbia officially submitted its application formembership of the EU. Accession negotiations finally began in 2014.Since then, work has beenongoing in a wide range of economic and political areas in order to move Serbia closer to the EU.Admittedly, our twinning project has been just one small building block in this extensiveintegration process. But, it has undoubtedly been an important one!Our project’s primary goal has been to improve work practices at the National Bank of Serbia andto align them with the practices of the European System of Central Banks. Today, all I can say is:“mission accomplished!”From the outset, our project has been a perfect example of sharing experiences and learningfrom one another. In particular, the formation of our consortium proved to be very fruitful. Theconsortium partners complemented each other very well. As a result, we were able to cover awide range of topics. Our Croatian colleagues took on the project components like datacoverage, international relations, insurance and pension fund supervision and liberalisation ofcapital movements. Our Romanian colleagues handled economic forecasting and modelling,foreign exchange reserve management, communication policy and financial stability. And, finally,the Bundesbank colleagues – supported by the Bank of Slovenia, the National Bank of Austria,the National Bank of Portugal and the National Bank of Slovakia – were responsible foraccounting, financial consumer protection and IT security.A long and impressive list indeed! This list illustrates the comprehensive character of the projectand all the hard work that has gone into it. Crucially, the commitment, responsibility,professionalism, and deep engagement of our Serbian counterparts were key in bringing theproject to a successful conclusion. All parties involved were united by their full determination tomake the project a success and by the “corporate spirit” through which central bankers aroundthe world feel connected.At today’s concluding celebration, everyone involved in this joint project can proudly look back:On the months of hard work and in-depth treatment of the subject matter, on the manydiscussions of different professional and personal perspectives and on the host of valuablepersonal contacts, and maybe even friendships, that have grown from it.Ladies and gentlemen,Allow me to close with a few words of thanks to the people behind the project. Thank you MsTabaković, especially for your commitment and strong support throughout the duration of theproject. I would also like to thank Ms Tomičić from the Croatian National Bank and Mr Matei fromthe Romanian National Bank. Your commitment to form a consortium between your institutions 2 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
and the Bundesbank and the large-scale support from your staff were indispensable for thesuccess of the project.My thanks also goes to the Project Leaders, Mr Savić from the National Bank of Serbia and MrSpicka from the Bundesbank – as well as to the Junior Project Leaders, Mr Lončarek from theCroatian National Bank and Mr Copaciu from the National Bank of Romania.Last but not the least, I would like to thank all of you who have made your own personalcontribution to the success of the project and whose names I wouldn’t be able to mention nowwithout running out of time: the managers of the individual components, the visiting experts andall those who took on the vital administrative work.Ladies and gentlemen,The German chancellor Angela Merkel recently emphasised that “theWestern Balkan states are also part of a united Europe.” In this spirit, I very much look forwardto continuing our cooperation as central banks in the years to come.At the 30th anniversary of the “pan-European picnic” in Sopron, Hungary, August 2019, seewww.bundeskanzlerin.de/bkin-en/news/merkel-in-ungarn-1662334.11 3 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
28.02.2020| Frankfurt am Main | Jens Weidmann 1 WelcomeLadies and gentlemen,A very warm welcome to our press conference, at which we will present our annual accounts.The French novelist and politician André Malraux is once thought to have said: “Those who wish to read the future must leaf through the past.”Today, we’re offering you an opportunity to leaf through our Annual Report and look back on the events which shaped the past year. At the same time, I would also like to look to the future, as I always do on these occasions.Introductory comments at the press conference to present the annual accounts 1 Welcome2 State of play in the economy3 Monetary policy4 Monetary policy strategy5 Climate change and central banks6 Public ﬁnances7 Annual accounts
I will therefore start my speech today by looking at what is currently shaping the economy and monetary policy, and also say a few words about the Eurosystem’s strategy review. Then I will brieﬂy touch upon two long-term challenges, namely climate action and demographics. After that, I will comment on our annual accounts for 2019.But let’s kick off with the economy.2 State of play in the economyGrowth in the global economy slowed signiﬁcantly last year.Problems in a raft of emerging market economies caused headwinds, as did the conﬂicts surrounding international trade policy. The trade dispute between the United States and China ﬂared up over the summer, with additional tariffs weighing on world trade. The tensions in the trade policy space sparked uncertainty in ﬁnancial markets, which is likely to have throttled investment and hurt global economic activity.The conclusion of a phase one deal in the trade dispute between the United States and China has, for now, warded off the risk of the situation coming to a head again. And a “hard” Brexit has been averted, too. Yet considerable uncertainties persist. For one thing, future economic relations between the United Kingdom and the EU still have not been hammered out. And then there are unﬁnished items on the transatlantic trade agenda that still need to be addressed, and the rules-based multilateral trading system is on shaky ground. Geopolitical uncertainty remains intense as well. It is mainly rippling out of the Middle East.A new risk factor has joined the fray as well. I am talking about the coronavirus. The epidemic in China has already caused many deaths. Human suffering causes the economic damage to pale by comparison.We know that the epidemic itself, along with the efforts to contain it, have considerably impaired business life in China. This is likely to depress economic output in China in Q1 and also have a noteworthy impact on global growth, given that China now accounts for nearly one-ﬁfth of the world economy.Other countries could have been affected as well, because, for instance, China's demand for goods and services has fallen – including that of Chinese tourists – or because global value chains have been disrupted. Although the Chinese economy is expected to quickly return to normal once the epidemic has died down, the spread of the new virus to other countries is an additional danger.In the short term, the spread of the coronavirus represents an additional risk to the German economy, too. Based on the current information, I am expecting this risk to actually materialise to a degree.[1]
In some countries, there have been mounting reports of cases of contagion, and the economy has already taken a direct hit in those places as well. These countries include, in particular, South Korea and Italy.This is also likely to spill over to the German economy: for instance, through reduced demand for goods, tourists staying home or delivery diﬃculties concerning key intermediate goods. As things stand today, it is almost impossible to gauge the effect reliably. It may well only show up with a signiﬁcant time lag. Should an epidemic break out in Germany, direct economic impacts must be expected alongside these ripple effects.Indeed, according to surveys, economic sentiment in Germany in February was largely unaffected by the impact of the coronavirus. And, up until recently, GDP growth appeared to be broadly in line with our projection of last December.In the ﬁnal quarter of 2019, the German economy, as expected, stayed rooted to the spot. This is because the downturn in export-oriented industry persisted and private consumption took a breather after a lively showing previously. On an average of 2019, the German economy grew by only roughly half a percent. And the Bundesbank’s December projection predicts a similarly low (calendar-adjusted) rate in 2020 as well.This was founded on the expectation that the economic headwinds from the international environment would subside over the course of the year and the German economy would thus emerge from its lull. Assuming that the viral epidemic puts an additional damper on economic activity in the ﬁrst half of 2020, a countermovement could take place in the second half of the year. On the whole, economic growth in Germany this year could turn out somewhat lower than projected last December by our experts. However, such statements are currently fraught with a great deal of uncertainty.This year, the German economy is obtaining major support from the still upbeat labour market situation, very favourable ﬁnancing conditions and increasing government expenditure. The relaxation of the ﬁscal stance will probably reach a magnitude of ¾% of GDP this year, so it could add ½ of a percentage point to growth.Economic activity in the euro area followed much the same trajectory as in Germany, but it was not quite as weak as it was here. Euro area GDP increased by 1.2% in 2019. For this year, the European Commission, for example, has expected activity to grow at a similarly moderate pace. These forecasts, too, are undoubtedly associated with heightened uncertainty. As you know, the ECB staff are busy drafting new projections. I do not wish to jump the gun on this topic.
3 Monetary policyWith the economy growing at a moderate pace, inﬂation will probably only ﬁrm up gradually in the euro area. The ECB Governing Council responded to the slight deterioration in the price outlook in summer with a whole package of monetary policy measures. In my view, it was right to lower the deposit facility rate slightly. But as you will know, I criticised the scale of the adopted package of measures.There is another thing the ECB Governing Council made clear with the decisions it adopted in September: the policy rate lift-off date will probably be a while in coming. Indeed, surveys from January show that market participants are not expecting the deposit facility rate to lift off before 2022. The latest market indicators suggest that uncertainty surrounding the lift-off date has intensiﬁed considerably amid the possible fallout from the coronavirus.There is no disputing the fact that support in the form of accommodative monetary policy is needed in order for inﬂation to approach our aim. That said, it is clear to me that the current low level of policy rates cannot be permitted to persist indeﬁnitely. The ECB Governing Council must not lose sight of the exit from its loose monetary policy. This is because ultra-accommodative money policy also comes with risks and side effects.In this regard, one aspect that sometimes gets the short end of the stick is the real economy. According to previous studies, the misallocation of capital in southern European countries has increased since the early 2000s. A working paper recently published by our Dutch colleagues shows that this is the case for our neighbour, too. They write that low-productivity ﬁrms effectively receive a subsidy on capital, driving them to produce more than would be optimal. This has a negative impact on aggregate productivity.Other working papers explore how cheap loans can help keep ﬁrms aﬂoat that might otherwise have exited the market. This can lead to excess capacity and put downward pressure on prices. A recent study ﬁnds that such dynamics could well be at work in Europe.The low interest rate environment can create incentives that help sustain unproductive ﬁrms in the market. However, there is not suﬃcient evidence to date of such causality. With that in mind, I see this as a risk thus far.[2][3][4][5]
Turning our attention to Germany, a Bundesbank study conducted a couple of years ago concluded that the importance of low-productivity, non-competitive ﬁrms that should really have exited the market was small and had not increased in the low interest rate setting that had prevailed for some years. This assessment is still valid, according to our experts.4 Monetary policy strategySeparate from the issues surrounding the monetary policy stance, the ECB Governing Council has another item on its agenda this year: a review of its money policy strategy. This got underway just over a month ago.In the past few years, the Bundesbank has already intensiﬁed its contact with the public, for which it has developed a variety of formats. As of now, the public is invited to comment on the strategy review of monetary policy through our website.In essence, it comes down to just one question: how can we best deliver on our mandate, which is to safeguard stable prices for people in the euro area?During its strategy review, the Governing Council of the ECB should not lose sight of the big picture. Like a mosaic, its constituent stones need to ﬁt together to create a meaningful whole. As we assess their ﬁtness for purpose, we should not view them in isolation. I would like to proceed by discussing individual elements of our strategy in more detail and, in doing so, highlight some interactions as well.It starts with the deﬁnition of our objective. Up to now, the ECB Governing Council has taken price stability to mean inﬂation rates of between 0% and 2%. Based on this deﬁnition, it strives for inﬂation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. This was clariﬁed the ECB Governing Council following the last strategy review in 2003. One key reason for this was to provide an adequate margin to zero inﬂation, thus reducing the risks of deﬂation.There is no doubt that the difference between our deﬁnition of price stability and our more speciﬁc monetary policy aim is a challenge for us to communicate. Even many experts are not fully familiar with the difference. And sometimes it is also assumed that the Eurosystem simply has an inﬂation target of 2%. But we do not.An increasing number of people are now calling for the targeted inﬂation rate to be raised. These calls are based on the experience of recent years showing that interest rate policy has increasingly been stretched to its limits. In many cases, this is seen as a symptom of a longer-term, fundamental problem. Many studies have shown that [6]
equilibrium real interest rates have dropped steeply over the past few decades. As a result, interest rate policy’s room for manoeuvre may have been diminished on a lasting basis.A credibly higher inﬂation target would push up inﬂation expectations and, in doing so, raise the nominal interest rate level, proponents argue. It might, therefore, seem the obvious thing to raise the target inﬂation rate to such a point that the decrease in real interest rates is balanced out. And that would be a strong hike. The margin to the lower policy rate bound would then be greater again and would offer more scope for any interest rate cuts. There are, however, other effects to bear in mind.First, the increase in monetary policy’s room for manoeuvre might not be as large as hoped. If ﬁrms adjust their price setting, the relationship between aggregate demand and inﬂation could be weakened. There would be more room to cut interest rates, but the impact of each individual interest rate move on inﬂation would be diminished. Second, there is a danger that inﬂation expectations cannot be re-anchored. Third, higher inﬂation generates costs as a result of factors such as price signal distortions. What’s more, it could give rise to undesirable distributional effects.This is why I do not believe it is a good idea to signiﬁcantly raise the targeted inﬂation rate. While the increase that is often mooted is only small, it is also frequently proposed that emphasis be placed on symmetry. Ultimately, it has much the same effect as a targeted inﬂation rate.Either way, this would increase pressure on monetary policymakers to take action. And it would be at a time when the positive impacts of monetary policy actions on the real economy are potentially dwindling while risks and side effects are on the rise.Take, for instance, the impact of low interest rates on banks. Banks beneﬁt from further cuts in interest rates in the short term, particularly via valuation effects – that is to say, rising asset prices. But the longer the low interest rate environment persists, the more diﬃcult it will become for banks to conduct their conventional lending and deposit business. This can hamper their intermediation capacity – as well as the transmission of monetary policy.Moreover, there is likely to exist a negative interest rate as from which further interest rate cuts will no longer stimulate bank lending. In our view, however, monetary policy in the euro area has not yet reached this reversal rate. This is something Christine Lagarde has also recently stressed.Of course, we shouldn’t (Tonne) tailor our strategy to the consequences we face today. After all, it needs to provide us with long-term guidance. But nor should we turn a blind eye to the consequences. Rather, we need to understand them.[7][8][9][10]
All in all, I propose that we formulate this aim in a way that is understandable, forward-looking and realistic.In future, we should tailor our monetary policy communications more closely to the general public. We should deﬁne our aim so that people can grasp it more easily and make sense of it, which means it must also reﬂect their real-life situations. That’s what I mean by the term “understandable”.Another important factor is to make sure that monetary policy safeguards stable prices in the medium term; in other words, it must look towards the future, as before. One of the reasons is that monetary policy measures only tend to take full effect after a certain amount of time. That’s what I mean when I say “forward-looking”.And ﬁnally, when setting our aim, we should make it clear that we cannot control inﬂation to the exact decimal point. That’s what I mean by “realistic”.I don’t (Tonne) think our current approach does such a bad job of meeting these three criteria.The advantage of deﬁning an aim in this way is that monetary policy, with its medium-term orientation, is given the necessary ﬂexibility. We therefore can, on occasion, wait if there is good reason to do so instead of rushing to respond to every change in the data before a reliable overall picture has formed.An aim that is deﬁned on the basis of these principles also goes a long way towards anchoring inﬂation expectations. People will only anchor their expectations to the targeted inﬂation rate if they understand what we are saying, receive guidance for the future, and believe that we have the ability and the will to achieve our aim.Ultimately, by deﬁning the aim in this way, we can factor in long-term risks to price stability. It is precisely long periods of accommodative monetary policy that potentially entail risks to ﬁnancial stability. And the ﬁnancial crisis showed us that turmoil in the ﬁnancial markets can ultimately also have knock-on effects for the economy and price stability.But the way in which we formulate our monetary policy aim is not the only area of our strategy we need to look into. To ensure price stability, the euro area inﬂation rate must also be measured correctly.[11]
Our chosen yardstick is the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP). Although rents are included in the basket of goods, the costs of living in owner-occupied property are not. If these were captured, however, these prices would gain a signiﬁcant weighting. That’s why we should think about adding an owner-occupied housing component to the HICP going forward.And we should take a closer look at which measurement biases are still relevant. Such biases were also one of the reasons behind the current level of our targeted inﬂation rate. But price statistics have moved on since the aim was set in 2003. In Germany, for example, the Federal Statistical Oﬃce is increasingly using hedonic methods of quality adjustment for its price statistics, mainly in order to accurately capture changes in the prices of short-lived technology products, such as smartphones or printers.To be able to ensure price stability, the monetary policy toolkit has to contain the right instruments – including when policy rates are already low.As I see it, we should base our choice of tools on two principles. First, the tools must be capable of inﬂuencing developments in the price level effectively. That’s absolutely essential. And second, any undesirable side-effects should be minimal.That’s why we should stick to a clear hierarchy when deploying these instruments. Because the non-standard measures taken over the past few years, in particular, probably differ from traditional interest rate policy in terms of their cost-beneﬁt ratio. I have often highlighted the risks associated with large-scale purchases of government bonds, especially.But our experiences with new instruments have also been positive. Amongst other things, a Bundesbank study conﬁrms that forward guidance has successfully steered long-term interest rates in the ECB Governing Council’s desired direction over the last few years, thus probably helping to support euro area economic activity.5 Climate change and central banksLadies and gentlemen,As part of the strategy review, we will also tackle the question of what role central banks should play when it comes to climate action. Climate change and climate action have indeed been attracting growing public attention of late.One thing is clear: climate action is a matter for elected governments and parliaments. They have the right tools at their disposal, such as taxes on CO emissions or emissions trading. And they have the necessary democratic legitimacy to use them.2[12][13][14][15][16]
But it’s equally clear to me that central banks can and should do more about climate change than they have up to now.Climate change and climate action can have economic repercussions that are relevant to maintaining price stability. Monetary policymakers must factor this into their analyses. Central banks are often just setting out on this journey. That’s why we must ﬁrst gain a clearer understanding of how far climate change and protective measures affect the economy and the ﬁnancial system.Both climate change and the transition to a less carbon-intensive economy may entail risks not only for enterprises in the real economy, but also for the ﬁnancial sector. These climate-related ﬁnancial risks need to be considered:First, it is up to credit institutions to incorporate such risks into their risk management. In turn, central banks, in their role as banking supervisors and guardians of ﬁnancial stability, must ensure that this is also carried out appropriately.But we shouldn’t (Tonne) just point the ﬁnger at others. In terms of the standards to which we are holding credit institutions here, we, as central banks, should practice what we preach. All the more so since, basically, our ﬁnancial assets can be just as exposed to ﬁnancial risk as those of commercial banks.I believe that central banks should likewise factor climate-related ﬁnancial risks into their risk management. And that should also go for our monetary policy operations and securities portfolios.On the other hand, I do not believe that preferential purchases of “green” bonds along the lines of “green QE” are the answer. When purchasing assets, we must stick to our market economy principles-based approach – with an emphasis on market neutrality.But that also means ensuring that the Eurosystem is only exposed to default risk on a limited scale. It is therefore in the Eurosystem’s interest that ﬁnancial risk stemming from climate change be made as transparent as possible. And this is where we should start.It might make sense for us to purchase and accept as collateral for monetary policy purposes only these kinds of securities for which the issuers meet certain climate-related reporting requirements. By taking this measure, the Eurosystem would also be supporting existing transparency initiatives.[17]
We could also examine whether taking climate-related ﬁnancial risks into account in the ratings is suitable as a criterion when it comes to buying securities or accepting collateral for monetary policy reﬁnancing operations. A criterion like this would enable us to foster comparable standards at rating agencies and banks.Both of these measures – transparency standards for issuers and requirements for ratings – wouldn’t (Tonne) just make it easier for us as central banks to take climate-related ﬁnancial risks into account. If designed properly, they could also generate greater transparency beyond the monetary policy asset purchase programmes and improve the level of information on climate risk in the capital market.With such measures, central banks could act as a catalyst for a more “green” ﬁnancial system and support the climate policy pursued by the EU and its Member States without thereby risking conﬂict with their own tasks.6 Public financesBesides climate action, we also face an additional major challenge: demographic change. This is likely to be a noticeable drag on trend growth in the German economy, making measures that strengthen the basis for growth all the more important.One of the key pillars in this must surely be public infrastructure, which still remains a locational advantage for Germany. That said, there are also some vulnerabilities that have to be ﬁxed. Investment in transport networks is one such issue. Climate policy goals could becoming increasingly important, too. Education and daycare places for children are examples of other areas where there is a perceived backlog.However, it isn’t (Tonne) always just a matter of the government in its role as an investor. In areas such as digitalisation or energy supply, the government instead has to create a suitable framework for private sector investment. Additional public investment has often been mooted already. However, it would be good to see these weak points remedied more quickly. Currently, construction capacity is having a constraining effect, and this is compounded by drawn-out proceedings before construction can even begin.At any rate, neither the lack of ﬁscal leeway nor the debt brake is standing in the way of higher government investment at present. The Federal Government currently has ﬁscal space. It closed last year very favourably yet again and has high reserves.However, the ﬁscal policy stance is expansionary. This means that ﬁscal space is shrinking. And there are considerable risks regarding, for instance, whether the solidarity surcharge can continue to be levied.
Demographic change will impose considerable additional burdens which will be increasingly reﬂected from the middle of the decade onwards: when baby boomers retire in the years to come, it is not just the funds for statutory pension insurance schemes that will come under signiﬁcant pressure, but the Federal Government budget, too. Central government funds more than one-quarter of the statutory pension insurance scheme's receipts. The Federal Government funds are largely geared to the contribution rate, which is expected to rise sharply as from 2025.We should therefore not lose sight of our goal of sound public ﬁnances. Given that, I would ﬁnally like to turn to our annual accounts.7 Annual accountsThe proﬁt and loss account for 2019 closed with a net proﬁt of €5,825 billion. After the dissolution of reserves (to the tune of €26 million), this yielded €5,851 billion, the highest distributable proﬁt since 2008.We transferred the proﬁt in full to the Federal Government today. According to the 2020 budget plan, €2.5 billion of this is to be used to ﬁnance the budget, with the remainder earmarked for debt repayment.Lower risk provisioning is the main reason for this strong rise in the proﬁt for the year We had increased our risk provisions by a total of €4.3 billion to €17.9 billion between 2016 and 2018 owing to the higher interest rate risk. This increase in risk provisioning was completed by the end of 2018.Interest rate risk had arisen primarily out of the major differences in maturity in our balance sheet. We have very substantial holdings of low interest-bearing assets, with very long residual maturities in some cases; our liabilities, however, are mainly in the form of short-term deposits.In 2019, this picture changed somewhat: overall risk had decreased compared to the previous year. For example, most of the ﬁxed-interest targeted longer-term reﬁnancing operations (TLTRO-II) will mature in 2020. The subsequent series of operations (TLTRO-III) have a variable rate of interest, for which I lobbied on the ECB’s Governing Council. On balance, the open interest rate position has dropped, thereby causing interest rate risk to decline. However, default risk, especially from maturing assets purchased under the Securities Markets Programme, has also declined.In light of this, the Executive Board has reviewed the extent to which risk provisioning is required for 2019. Besides the Bank’s current and foreseeable risk situation, we also took account of its available ﬁnancial resources. On balance, we have conservatively reduced the risk provision by €1.5 billion to €16.4 billion.
However, I’d like to highlight another particular feature of these annual accounts, because, for the ﬁrst time since 2014, our total assets fell again somewhat last year. On the assets side, this decline in total assets was mainly driven by return ﬂows of liquidity to other European countries. On the liabilities side, the euro balances of other resident and non-resident investors recorded the largest decreases. This was driven chieﬂy by foreign central banks.And now I’d like to give the ﬂoor to Mr Beermann, who as the Member of the Executive Board responsible for the annual accounts will explain them in more detail. Afterwards, you will have the opportunity to ask questions as usual.Thank you.Footnotes:Deutsche Bundesbank, The impact of trade policy uncertainty, Monthly Report, January 2020, pp. (pages) 57-60.1. Gopinath, G., S. (Seite) Kalemli-Özcan, L. Karabarbounis and C. Villegas-Sanchez (2017), Capital allocation and productivity in South Europe, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. (Volume) 132, pp. (pages) 1915-1967; Gamberoni, E., C. Giordano and P. Lopez-Garcia (2016), Capital and labour (mis)allocation in the euro area: some stylized facts and determinants, European Central Bank, Working Paper Series, No 1981, November 2016.2. Bun, M. and J. de Winter (2019), Measuring trends and persistence in capital and labor misallocation, De Nederlandsche Bank, Working Paper, No 639.3. Acharya, V.V ., T. Eisert, C. Euﬁnger and C. Hirsch (2019), Whatever it takes: The real effects of unconventional monetary policy, Review of Financial Studies, Vol. (Volume) 32, pp. (pages) 3366-3411; Andrews, D. and F. Petroulakis (2019), Breaking the shackles: Zombie ﬁrms, weak banks and depressed restructuring in Europe, European Central Bank, Working Paper Series, No 2240; Blattner, L., L. Farinha and F. Rebelo (2019), When losses turn into loans: the cost of undercapitalized banks, European Central Bank, Working Paper Series, No 2228.4. Acharya, V. V., M. Crosignani, T. Eisert and C. Euﬁnger (2019), Zombie Credit and (Dis-)Inﬂation: Evidence from Europe, New York University Stern School of Business, Working Paper.5. Deutsche Bundesbank (2017), The emergence of zombie ﬁrms in Germany in the low-interest-rate environment, Monthly Report, December 2017, pp. (pages) 37-40.6. Deutsche Bundesbank (2017), The natural rate of interest, Monthly Report, October 2017, pp. (pages) 27-42.7. Deutsche Bundesbank (2018), Lower bound, inﬂation target and the anchoring of inﬂation expectations, Monthly Report, June 2018, pp. (pages) 31-50.8. 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2018), The importance of bank proﬁtability and bank capital for monetary policy, Monthly Report, January 2018, pp. (pages) 27-52.9. European Central Bank (2019), transcript of the press conference on the monetary policy meeting of the ECB Governing Council on 12 December 2019.10. Weidmann, J. (2020), Change and continuity, Deutsche Bundesbank, speech delivered on 3 February 2020.11. Deutsche Bundesbank (2018), Further reasons to select a positive target rate of inﬂation, Monthly Report, June 2018, pp. (pages) 34-36.12. Destatis (2020), Qualitätsbereinigung in der amtlichen Preisstatistik, 13. Weidmann, J. (2018), From extraordinary to normal – reﬂections on the future monetary policy toolkit, Deutsche Bundesbank, speech delivered on 16 November 2018.14. Weidmann, J. (2019), What the future holds – Beneﬁts and limitations of forward guidance, Deutsche Bundesbank, speech delivered on 22 November 2019.15. Geiger, F. and F. Schupp (2018), With a little help from my friends: Survey-based derivation of euro area short rate expectations at the effective lower bound, Deut-sche Bundesbank Discussion Paper No 27/2018.16. Weidmann, J. (2019), Consistency as a mandate, Deutsche Bundesbank, speech delivered on 28 November 2019.17. Link zur Webseite
Mugur Isărescu: Opening speech – conference “Investment andInvestment Finance in Romania”Opening speech by Mr Mugur Isărescu, Governor of the National Bank of Romania, at theconference “Investment and Investment Finance in Romania”, organized by the National Bank ofRomania and the European Investment Bank, Bucharest, 13 February 2020.*   *   *Vice President McDowell,State Secretary Gyorgy Attila,Distinguished audience,Ladies and gentlemen,It is a pleasure for me and the Board of Directors to welcome you at the National Bank ofRomania, to the conference dedicated to Investment and Investment Finance in Romania. Thisconference has been organized by the European Investment Bank in partnership with theNational Bank of Romania. In fact, this partnership has had a long standing as a pillar forprogress and investment in Romania.Please allow me to express a heart-felt welcome and to extend my warmest thanks to Mr.Andrew McDowell, Vice-President of the European Investment Bank and to Ms. DeboraRevoltella, Chief Economist of the European Investment Bank, for their continuous support anddeep commitment to develop investments in Romania, and, moreover, for being trusted partnersand friends.I am glad that we have decided to co-organize this conference here in Romania, at the centralbank, as this year we honour two landmarks with historic importance. One is the National Bankof Romania’s 140th anniversary and the other is the 20 years’ celebration of the day (February15th 2000) when the EU formally started the accession negotiations with Romania. I rememberthat moment vividly, as it happened during my mandate as Prime Minister of Romania.As a veteran, in office since 1990, I am fully aware to what extent Romania has benefited fromthe significant support provided by the European Investment Bank. The projects financed by EIBproved to be a catalyst for development, with a multiplier effect in all the economic sectors.Nevertheless, Romania continues to need (i) to develop solid growth strategies based oninvestments and (ii) to accomplish the development priorities in infrastructure, healthcare andsmall and medium enterprises (SMEs), as well as (iii) to enhance cohesion with the other EUmember states.The future will certainly bring challenges as well as opportunities. One opportunity, as per thelatest European Investment Bank’s flagship report on investment, is the present context of lowinterest rates, which could provide support for speeding up lending and investments. There isadequate room for upscaling public investment in areas such as: smart infrastructure, digitaltechnology and education. Fairly new topics like the digital economy and FinTech, as well asclimate change risks and Green Finance are gaining ground and importance on everyone’sagenda, having the potential to shift capital allocation and contribute to new investments.Ladies and gentlemen, please allow me to stress the importance of the EU structural andcohesion funds for Romania and to point out the need for further foreign direct investments.Since joining the EU and until 2018, Romania had accessed more than 21 billion EUR as EUfunds that contributed to development and bridged the gap of convergence with developedeconomies in the EU. 1 / 2BIS central bankers' speeches
NBR’s recent research on the impact of EU funds on Romanian economy shows that an increase by 1percentage point of GDP in structural and cohesion funds has a short term eﬀect of up to 0.7percentage points on economic growth and a medium-term effect of up to 3 percentage points.Thus, significant efforts should be made to guarantee that Romania improves the efficiency ofEU funds absorption. In order to achieve that, Romania needs sound policies oriented towardsmacroeconomic balance and safeguarding financial stability.Foreign direct investments are also essential for economic growth. The picture here is mixed.During the second half of the year 2018 and in 2019, persistent pressures on global economicgrowth and subsequent downward revisions of expected growth rate impacted the investmentsand the reallocation of capital. Constant trade tensions, terrorism and geopolitical uncertaintiesare causing a slowdown in economies across the world. At the same time, new technologieshave disrupted global value chains and the classic employment model, while new climatechange related risks have emerged in the financial sector. On the other part, investing incompanies with strong environmental, social and governance (ESG) policies, in green bonds andin new technologies supporting the digital economy, will contribute to achieving the ParisAgreement objectives and a sustainable development.The European Commission and the European Investment Fund (part of the European InvestmentBank Group) have launched the ”BlueInvest Fund” available for the “blue” economic activities.The funds are aimed at companies that develop solutions for renewable energy and “blue”biotechnology, among others.I will conclude my brief opening speech on a special, more personal note.Dear Mr. McDowell, this summer you will complete your tenure as Vice President of theEuropean Investment Bank. On behalf of the Board of Directors of the National Bank of Romania,allow me to express our gratitude and highest regards for your activity during your mandate.Please accept the expression of genuine appreciation for your commitment, your dedication andyour leadership, which have led to remarkable results in investments in the Romanian economy.We wish you all the best possible outcomes for all your future endeavours.I now invite Gyorgy Attila, State Secretary at the Ministry of Public Finance to take the floor.1 NBR Annual Report 2018, pages 21 – 2611 2 / 2BIS central bankers' speeches
    Public lecture by Lesetja Kganyago,  Governor of the South African Reserve Bank,  at the University of the Free State  Bloemfontein 4 March 2020  Sound policy is an imperative for growth  Good evening, ladies and gentlemen.  Thank you for inviting me here today to speak about the South African economy.   I am going to focus on how we should see macroeconomic policy and its role in our economic growth problem.    There is a principle in economics, known as Dornbusch’s Rule, that a crisis takes longer to happen than you expect, but then occurs faster than you can believe. It is the macroeconomic version of the old rule about how you go bankrupt: slowly, then quickly. The point is that you get a lot of bad data before the system breaks. Experts will warn about a crisis, and after a while, these warnings will become part of the background noise. But when the crisis comes, its timing will still surprise everyone.   In South Africa, we are getting used to talking about a crisis. Every time the Minister of Finance presents a new Budget or MTBPS1 to Parliament, the press calls it a ‘make or break’ event, or the most important budget since the dawn of democracy. I have been answering questions about a Moody’s downgrade for years. We are even discussing distant possibilities, like an IMF programme, as if they were imminent. Actually, while our debt to GDP ratio has more than doubled over 10 years, it is still in the region of the emerging market average, which is 55%. Our debt has a long maturity profile, and is mostly denominated in rands, which minimises the risk of losing market access and being forced to ask the IMF for help.    The debt problem is not where we are. The problem is where we are going.                                                             1 Medium Term Budget Policy Statement 
   A debt-to-GDP ratio of 60% isn’t a disaster. But our fiscal deficits are over 6% of GDP, and National Treasury expects a deficit of nearly 7% of GDP for 2020/2021.2 At that rate of borrowing, it doesn’t take long to get to a dangerous level of debt. Some analysts suggest we could get to a 100% debt-to-GDP ratio within a few years. In that scenario, lenders might give up on us. Or we could see our interest bill claim even more of our scarce resources.   But we haven’t locked in that path yet. We are suffering the consequences of past mistakes, but we still have time to make better decisions. It’s crucial we use this time wisely. In economic terms, our problems can be addressed. But there is a real danger of getting our narrative wrong, so we end up having the wrong discussion, we don’t solve our problems, and we learn our mistake the hard way, by having a crisis. This talk is my contribution to prevent that, by getting the narrative right.   Let’s start with the macroeconomic stance. I only have responsibility for one part of the macro mix, which is monetary policy, but the Constitution enjoins me to consult regularly with the Minister of Finance, so that fiscal and monetary policies are in sync. It’s therefore important that we understand what fiscal policy is doing and how it interacts with monetary policy. Accordingly, we as the SARB have invested considerable time and effort in this task.   By our calculations, the fiscal impulse to growth was around 0.6% last year.3 This estimate excludes bailouts for state-owned enterprises as well as interest payments. A positive fiscal impulse shows that policy is not austere. And yet overall growth was just 0.2%, suggesting that the economy experienced a contractionary fiscal expansion – despite the fiscal impulse, the growth rate of the economy slowed. This combination of looser fiscal policy and worse growth points to policy side-effects that cancelled out the fiscal impulse, leaving the economy poorer overall.   What are these indirect effects? One is confidence. We can see in surveys that both household and business confidence is near long-term lows at the moment. People have seen taxes go up, they see debt rising, but they do not see this spending producing better services. It is a discouraging picture. Businesses are still investing, but they are not ramping up production. Households are holding off on major purchases. There is also evidence more highly skilled people are leaving the country.4                                                              2 The 2020 Budget projects 6.8% for 2020/21. 3 This calculation is based on the methodology developed by the Hutchins Center at the Brookings Institution, described here: https://www.brookings.edu/interactives/hutchins-center-fiscal-impact-measure/  4 Faulkner, D and Mosadi, T. 11 November 2019. South Africa: the economic implications of high-skill emigration. Available at https://www.research.hsbc.com/R/20/7gNXQNqHnC2d. See also Kaplan, D. 3 October 2019. Packing for Perth: skills flight is a reality, and we must plan for it. Available at https://www.dailymaverick.co.za/article/2019-10-03-packing-for-perth-skills-flight-is-a-reality-and-we-must-plan-for-it/. 
  A second indirect effect is through long-term interest rates. As you know, we at the SARB have reduced the repo rate lately, with cuts in July 2019 and January 2020. We have also tried to steer inflation expectations lower, towards the middle of our target range – and we have seen results, with all measures of inflation expectations declining. Both these changes would normally have shifted long-term interest rates lower. As financial analysts would say, they should have lowered the whole yield curve.   Unfortunately, the yield curve has actually steepened: the gap between short rates and long rates is now the widest on record.5 This is the result of country risk. It is the markets sending a message that there is too much borrowing. It is not about tight monetary policy. As I have explained, lower short rates and lower inflation expectations, which are the main channels between monetary policy and long-term rates, have both been working to reduce rates. Indeed, if it weren’t for these factors, the long-term rate would likely be around 100-200 basis points higher than it is now, making our interest costs even more burdensome.    As it is, interest costs are reducing the real money available for government to spend – reducing the real value of budgets. And these costs have also doubled in the past five years, to nearly 5% of GDP. Furthermore, a higher risk premium has spread through the rest of the economy, disincentivising investment by raising the cost of capital.  Simply put, our fiscal situation isn’t a problem of austerity. It isn’t about tight monetary policy. It isn’t because growth just mysteriously slowed down. Weak growth is endogenous in our fiscal problems. We cannot keep doing what we’re doing and just hope that growth will recover and save us. Growth is low, in large part, because of unsustainable policies.  My friend, the Finance Minister Tito Mboweni is a man who says things that are true even when they are unpopular. His message is that we have to reduce spending, and he is right to put this at the centre of our macroeconomic debate. We can all shout at him and resist his proposals, and in the end he will at least have the satisfaction of being proved right. Or we can follow his advice, solve this problem, and avoid a crisis.    Now let me move to my core responsibility, which is monetary policy. Once again, I’d like to start with a major misunderstanding, one which has plagued us for many years. It is the deep-seated belief that there is a trade-off between growth and inflation. This conviction has exposed us to something economists call ‘stagflation’ – in other words, economic stagnation – low growth – and high inflation happening at the same time.                                                             5 Based on the gap between the 2021 and the 2048 instruments. The yield curve is also unusually steep comparing other instruments, such as the 2-year and 10-year bonds.  
   At the SARB, we have often had to fight against the tide of opinions which says: let’s cut interest rates, we need more growth, so let’s just tolerate more inflation. The tragedy is that this instinct has left us looking in the wrong direction. In fact, there is a better space, one that many other countries have reached, where inflation is low, where interest rates are therefore lower, and where central banks can be more sensitive to growth precisely because inflation is better anchored. In this space, you don’t need to choose between growth and inflation. You can have growth without high inflation.   Over the past few years, we at the SARB have undertaken a major strategic initiative to get closer to this good space. Our starting point was stagflation. In 2016, growth had slowed to 0.4%, but we also had inflation outside of our target range, above 6%, and core inflation was nearly 6%, having trended steadily higher over the preceding five years – even as the economy decelerated.   To return inflation to target, we had raised rates, to a peak of 7% in 2016. Then, as inflation began moderating, we were patient, and we communicated that we would prefer to see inflation stabilise at around the middle of the target range. Inflation has since largely cooperated: over the past three years, it has averaged 4.6%. Progress has been somewhat more rapid than we had expected, in part due to lower food prices and an exchange rate recovery, which helped to bring down underlying inflation. That has created extra space to lower the repo rate. With the January MPC cut, the repo rate is now down to 6.25%, its lowest level since 2015.   The key point is, we are now in a place where we have got inflation lower, and we have been able to cut rates without sacrificing our credibility. This is how monetary policy is meant to work: you cut rates from a position of strength, because you have inflation under control, not out of weakness, because you have given up trying.    That’s the good news. The bad news is that monetary policy alone cannot turn this economy around. As yesterday’s GDP figures reminded us, the supply-side of this economy is in deep trouble. We experienced a technical recession in the second half of the year, and growth for 2019 as a whole was just 0.2%, the worst rate since the Global Financial Crisis. Analysts have focused on electricity shortages as an important contributor to these bad outcomes, with good reason. Unfortunately, these kinds of growth constraints are beyond the reach of monetary policy.   The scope for monetary policy is also limited by the fact that inflation has stayed relatively high. In South Africa, we tend to think inflation has collapsed when it’s below 4.5%, but in much of the rest of the world, this is not considered low inflation. The median emerging market had inflation of 2.9% last year, compared to our 4.1%. Brazil, a country much like South Africa, but with a history of significantly higher inflation, was at 3.8%. Advanced economies are lower still; the United States 
  (US), for example, was at 1.5% in 2019.6 If South African inflation were to moderate further, we would have more space to lower interest rates. But even with extremely low growth, inflation does not appear to be slowing further, and we see almost no risk of inflation missing our target from below, which has been a problem for many other countries.  Given that inflation does not appear to be falling much further, gaining more space for interest rate cuts means we would need to reduce the impact of country risk. Global rates are low, and that helps. But South Africa borrows heavily from the world. Our current account deficit, which is equal to the foreign savings that come into South Africa, is close to 4% of GDP. Almost all our peer countries borrow less. If we try to cut rates too far, despite the country risk, investors won’t have enough reason to be in South Africa. They would be better off investing in less risky places. So we need to become less risky, to enjoy more of the benefits of low global rates. Key public-sector drivers of inflation, like the public sector wage bill and administered prices, could also help ease inflation. This is where fiscal and monetary policies need to be in sync.  Finally, and more fundamentally, we need to appreciate the limits on what any monetary toolbox can do for growth. Let me give you the example of Italy. Italy is part of the euro zone. Euro area inflation has been very low, and the European Central Bank has made a major effort to push it back up again, with policies including negative interest rates and quantitative easing. But Italy has a large debt burden. It has problems of political and fiscal policy uncertainty.   Over the past five years, Italy has had average growth of less than 1%. Germany, with the exact same monetary policy, has had average growth closer to 2%. Spain, which, like Italy, was a major victim of the 2011-2012 euro crisis, has averaged nearly 3%.7 Clearly, the tailwind of easy monetary policy was not enough to overcome the headwinds of Italy’s other challenges. Of course, South Africa is a different country. But what you should take away from this is that there is much more to growth than monetary policy, and it is still possible to stagnate with the loosest monetary policy imaginable.   The fact of the matter is, South Africa has not made itself a high-growth country. We do not save enough to fund adequate levels of investment. We invest less than 20% of GDP; to sustain strong growth, we should have investment of at least 25% of GDP. We have focused on domestic                                                            6 This number refers to the change in the Private Consumption Expenditure deflator,  the Federal Reserve’s targeted measure of inflation.  7 The exact averages are 1.7% for Germany, 0.9% for Italy, and 2.9% for Spain, for the period 2015-2019. The data are drawn from the IMF World Economic Outlook database. 
  consumption as a growth driver, on the grounds that it is the largest part of the economy. This effort has raised household consumption to its highest ever share of GDP.8   But we are growing more slowly than ever. We have accumulated debt faster than almost all our peer countries, on the grounds that fiscal policy has to be supportive of growth. But growth stimulus works for smoothing out business cycles; it’s not a long-run growth strategy. Long-run growth is about savings, investment and exports. It is about raising productivity. We in South Africa have deliberately run down savings, focused on consumption, and pulled in imports. Our productivity growth is exceptionally low, perhaps negative. We should therefore not be surprised that growth has stagnated.   Ladies and gentlemen, to conclude: we in South Africa have got to reform. It will involve some pain, but the longer we delay, the more painful it will be. We can tell ourselves comforting stories about how there are pain-free alternatives, but these narratives are misleading. We have spent a lot of time searching for easy options. These schemes don’t stand up to scrutiny.   Here’s what we can really do about mitigating the pain of necessary reform.   First, we can take the edge off with the interest rate tool. Provided we have lower inflation, and if country risk comes down, we can keep rates low, and maybe go lower.   Second, we can devise a credible plan for making things better again. In macroeconomics, as in so many things, it’s not about where you are, so much as where you’re going.   The story of the last few years has been that South Africa is drifting into a crisis. This has been the South African story before. We have, in the past, been able to change the narrative. South Africa has many friends, and there is a lot of money out there desperate for good growth economies to invest in. We can be one of those winning countries again.   Thank you.                                                               8 In the third quarter of 2019, household consumption reached 62.1% of GDP (using real, seasonally adjusted and annualised data). Over the past 20 years, the average has been slightly below 60% of GDP. Investment and government consumption are also above long-run averages, while net exports are lower. 
Benjamin E Diokno: Gearing up for the road ahead - with foresightand purposeSpeech by Mr Benjamin E Diokno, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the centralbank of the Philippines), at the 17th Professional Insurance and Financial Advisors Association ofthe Philippines, Manila, 27 February 2020.*   *   *Officers and members of the Professional Insurance and Financial Advisors Association of thePhilippines (PIFAAP), led by its Chairperson, Ms. Esperanza Chong, and President JeffGonzales, ladies and gentlemen, good morning.I would like to thank you for this opportunity to talk about BSP’s views on the country’s economicoutlook for 2020 and beyond at PIFAAP’s 17th Annual Congress, with the theme, “P2P: FromProfit to Purpose.”Most of us know the term “P2P” refers to the transport service that brings you from Point A toPoint B. This reminds us of how policymaking works at the BSP, where it is important that weare able to assess where the economy is and to know where we want it to be.As the country’s central monetary authority, the BSP is firmly committed to fulfilling its price andfinancial stability mandates as a means of supporting economic growth that is strong,sustainable, and inclusive.It is for this reason that I chose the theme of my presentation today, “Gearing up for the roadahead: With foresight and purpose.”Having foresight helps us prepare for the future, in the face of widespread uncertainties. Having aclear purpose enables us to stay the course and not to wobble on our commitment and resolveto move forward amid the challenges that come our way.And there are indeed significant risks and challenges clouding the global and domestic economicenvironment today. Among the risks currently on our radar screens are the following:On the external front in 2019, the global economy was heavily weighed down by trade policyuncertainties and geopolitical tensions.The IMF, in its World Economic Outlook (WEO) Update released last month (January 20),estimated that the world economy grew by a modest 2.9 percent in 2019. It projects that it wouldpick up slightly to 3.3 percent this 2020, although it should be noted that this has been reviseddownward from the October 2019 WEO. This shows that the world economy remains weak.Further on the external front, major risks include:Rising geopolitical tensions, notably between the US and Iran, as well as social unrest insome countries (e.g., Hong Kong, Argentina, Chile, Iran, Iraq, Turkey, and Venezuela), coulddisrupt activity and hurt already tepid business sentiment;Still high trade barriers between US and China could continue to imperil global supplychains, erode sentiment, and undermine global manufacturing and trade; andRecent coronavirus outbreak which has been declared as “global health emergency” by theWorld Health Organization (WHO). Growing concern over COVID-19 has likewise weigheddown on growth prospects not only in China but globally. 1 / 7BIS central bankers' speeches
On the domestic front, the major risks include: first, failure to address infrastructure bottlenecks,and second, incapacity to enhance disaster resilience amid increased intensity and frequency ofnatural hazards.As we prepare to overcome these challenges, we should look for new ways of doing things,pursue structural reforms, and strengthen our institutions along the way.As it stands today, the Philippine economy is poised to sustain its 84 quarters of uninterruptedgrowth despite increased global uncertainties along with emerging domestic challenges.A quick glance at some of the key economic indicators in 2019 show that the country’s robustmacroeconomic fundamentals remained intact.Real GDP growth grew by 6.4 percent in Q4 2019, supported by accelerated governmentspending, which resulted in full year growth of 5.9 percent. The full-year outturn was close to thelower end of the national government’s growth target range of 6.0 percent – 6.5 percent in 2019.Despite strong headwinds, the domestic economy in 2019 continued to demonstrate resilienceand stability, characterized by:Sustained growth momentum;Favorable inflation environment;Ample liquidity and credit;Robust external position;Sound and stable banking system; andModest fiscal deficit.The 2019 GDP growth rate was a tad lower than the revised official growth target range of thenational government of 6.0 to 6.5 percent. But what is impressive is that the country hasremained one of the fastest-growing economies, not only in Asia, but in the world.On the demand side, the economy continues to be supported by sustained householdconsumption and quickened in public spending during the second half of 2019. On the supply side, growth was driven still by broad-based expansion of services and industrysectors supported largely by the strong numbers coming from financial intermediation; publicadministration and defense, compulsory social security; trade and repair of motor vehicles; andconstruction. Despite the El Niño phenomenon and the lingering effects of African Swine Fever, the agriculturesector managed to grow by 1.5 percent during the year.In 2019, headline inflation was 2.5 percent, well within the government’s target range of 2.0-4.0percent, and was supported mainly by decelerating food inflation. The benign inflation is expectedto support consumption demand moving forward.This slide shows the series of BSP policy actions pursued in 2019. The much improved inflationdynamics so far alongside the benign inflation outlook have given the BSP space to reduce policyrate by 25 bps each in May, August, and September 2019, respectively, as a pre-emptive moveagainst the risks associated with weakening global growth.In its most recent monetary policy stance meeting on 6 February 2020, the Monetary Boardconcluded that a further preemptive reduction in the policy rate to support market confidence wasnecessary and cut policy rate by 25 bps. 2 / 7BIS central bankers' speeches
It was also noted that the phenomenal spread of the 2019 novel coronavirus could have anadverse impact on the global economy and market sentiment in the coming months.Looking ahead, we expect inflation to gradually rise but remain on a target-consistentpath for 2020 and 2021. Inflation expectations also continue to be firmly anchored withinthe target over the policy horizon. Meanwhile, the risks to the inflation outlook continue to tiltslightly toward the upside in 2020 and toward the downside in 2021. This is depicted in the fanchart on the left-hand side. Upside risks to inflation over the near term arise mainly from potential upward pressures on foodprices owing in part to the African Swine Fever outbreak and tighter international supply of rice.Moreover, there continues to be the burden on the economy posed by the ongoing Taal volcanoeruption and the aftermath of typhoon Tisoy.However, uncertainty over trade and economic policies in major economies such as China, USand Europe  continue to put downward pressure on global demand, thus easing upwardpressures on prices of some commodities like oil.Meanwhile, the Philippine banking system remains strong and sound.Philippine banks are sufficiently capitalized and past due ratios have also declined over theyears, contributing to greater ability to intermediate funds, manage risk, and increase profitability.The stability and soundness of the banking system is due to a large part to the strategic andprogressive financial reform agenda of the BSP in banking supervision, cyber security andtechnology risk management, anti-money laundering, counter-terrorist financing, and capitalmarket development.We want the Philippine banking system to remain strong in financial intermediation andpromoting greater economic activity.The manageable external payments position has provided a strong buffer for thedomestic economy against external headwinds.Recently, the balance of payments (BOP) position had a turnaround from a deficit position in2018, to a surplus of US$7.8 billion for 2019.  This may be attributed partly to higher net inflows offoreign direct investments and foreign portfolio investments which was bolstered by favorableinvestor sentiment.The current account was in a deficit position, in the first three quarters of 2019.  But the deficithas narrowed significantly-from a deficit of US$5.8 billion in 2018 down to a deficit of US$992million in 2019. This development came largely from the lower trade in goods deficit combined with higher netreceipts in the trade in services, and in the primary and secondary income accounts.We also have structural sources of foreign exchange, which provide substantial cushionfrom external shocks.First, foreign direct investments or (FDI) remain resilient. For the period Jan-Nov 2019, it reachedUS$6.4 billion. It is lower compared to 2018 due to lingering global uncertainty which dampenedinvestor sentiment.Second, overseas Filipino remittances as well as BPO earnings are sustained. Cashremittances reached US$30.1 billion in 2019 an increase of 4.1 percent year-on-year.  On theother hand, BPO revenues were recorded at US$16.4 billion for the first three quarters of 2019. 3 / 7BIS central bankers' speeches
Meanwhile, data as of end-January 2020 shows that the country’s gross international reserves(GIR) stood at US$86.9 billion.This level of GIR is more than enough to finance 7.6 months’ worth of imports of goods andservices and payment of primary income. It is also equivalent to 5.4 times the country’s short-term external debt based on original maturity.The sustained favorable external debt profile is also another factor supporting theexternal sector position. The country’s external debt metrics have steadily improved. Theexternal debt-to-GDP ratio is 23.7 percent as of end-September 2019, a sharp departure fromabout 60.0 percent in 2005, before the onset of the Global Financial Crisis (GFC).A large part of the country’s external debt remains in medium-to-long term maturityprofile supporting a manageable debt repayment schedule over the medium-to-long termhorizon.The Philippine economy not only has ample monetary policy space but also fiscal spaceto respond to any downside risks to growth. The improving fiscal position of the government,supported by the series of fiscal reforms in both tax revenue generation and tax collection,provides the government the resources to increase public investments and support domesticdemand.This fiscal space will also help boost private investment via the infrastructure push, and willconsequently expand the country’s productive capacity to ensure a durable and sustainablegrowth in the years to come.Moving forward, we are optimistic that the Philippine growth momentum will be sustained.The current administration is in a strong position to push for reforms by leveraging on its strongpolitical capital.Results of institutional and governance reform surveys are positively recognized by independentthird-party assessors. The country has indeed made important strides in enhancing itscompetitiveness over the past years. This is the essence of what we are doing on a pro-activebasis, and this is to future-proof the Philippine economy.The country’s improved creditworthiness, exemplified by the country’s elevation to investment-grade territory, has cemented the Philippines’ status as an economy with one of the brightestprospects globally.Our sound macroeconomic fundamentals, supported by structural reforms, have been dulyrecognized by credit rating agencies. International rating agencies have taken notice of thestrides that the country has taken in the areas of economic reform and liberalization that haveproduced the current growth and stability the country exhibits. Credit rating upgrades mean lowerborrowing costs for the country. At investment grade, a country is seen to be fully able to serviceits foreign debts.Fitch Ratings and Moody’s Investors Service kept the Philippines one notch above minimuminvestment grade. Meanwhile, the latest credit rating upgrades given by Standard and Poor’s andJCRA in April 2019 and by the Japan-based R&I credit rating agency just earlier this month placethe Philippines only a step away from our targeted single “A” grade in the next two years.Having an A-rating will place the Philippines in the radar of more investors, which bodes well forattracting more job-generating investments.The same optimism is shared by third-party assessors such as the International Monetary Fund 4 / 7BIS central bankers' speeches
(IMF), the World Bank (WB) and the Asian Development Bank (ADB). Not surprisingly, theyexpect the Philippine economy to remain one of the fastest-growing economies in 2020, not onlyregionally, but globally. These multilateral agencies expect the Philippines to expand by 6.1percent to 6.3 percent this year.In fact, some market analysts are even more optimistic. Shortly after the release of the Q4 2019GDP figure on 23 January, Morgan Stanley, Barclays, HSBC, PNB, and Nomura also releasedtheir 2020 projections for the Philippine economy which ranged from 6.0 percent to as high as6.7 percent.The expectation of sustained growth momentum is not without basis. In fact, there are keystructural changes pointing to increased efficiency and productivity of the economy. In these charts we can see the following:1. the steady improvements in economic efficiency as indicated by the declining incrementalcapital-output ratio;2. increasing total factor productivity; and3. favorable labor market dynamics given the young population and improvements in theeducation and skill sets of those in the labor force.Another key factor that lends support to the higher growth potential of the Philippine economy isthe country’s demographic profile.The IMF predicts the country’s dependency ratio to decline steadily until 2050, considerably lowerthan its regional peers. This implies that the expanding Philippine economy will not fall short ofsupply of young, skilled, and educated workers. This should also positively affect savings andinnovation, leading to an increase in total factor productivity and to longer periods of economicgrowth.All told, economic indicators suggest that the country has been making remarkable progresstowards achieving its goals. Prospects for the domestic economy continue to remain favorableas domestic growth fundamentals are expected to remain intact. GDP expansion is expected tocontinue to pick up in 2020 due to the robust growth in the services sector and improved externaltrade conditions.Private demand is expected to remain firm, aided mainly by sustained remittance inflows andstable inflation.As more “Build, Build, Build” projects get completed, the positive spillover effects on privateconstruction would also contribute to economic growth.So what is the BSP’s role in upholding this positive Philippine macroeconomic narrative? Weremain steadfast in our commitment to effectively discharge of our mandates in order for us togear up for the road ahead.1. Achieving our primary mandate of price stability through the effective conduct of monetarypolicy.2. Upholding financial stability thru banking supervision and regulation and the pursuit offinancial reforms.3. Ensuring an efficient payments and settlement system thru the operation of real-timesettlement system to reduce the cost of exchanging good and services.Our policy and reform agenda involve strategic, complementary and reinforcing efforts indeveloping deeper money, debt, and FX markets that systematically build the country’s resilience 5 / 7BIS central bankers' speeches
by reducing reliance on external funding and insulating the domestic economy from externalshocks. At the same time, we are pursuing initiatives to deepen the local debt market.  This willgo a long way in funding infrastructure and other big-ticket investments.To support our financial inclusion agenda, we are championing an enabling environment for thedigitalization of the payments system. Our flagship project is the National Retail PaymentsSystem (NRPS) which is expected to boost economic activities by making available an inter-operable, safe, and efficient real-time digital payments system.The passage of Republic Act No. 11211, or an Act Amending Republic Act No. 7653, known asthe ‘New Central Bank Act’ (signed on 14 February 2019) is a significant milestone for the BSP.The pursuit of the BSP mandates were further strengthened with the expansion of the BSP’spolicy toolkit.  The new BSP charter embodies a package of reforms that will further align itsoperations and global best practices and improve its corporate viability.Specifically,The law restored the central bank’s authority to issue its own debt papers as part of itsregular monetary operations, establishes a stronger prudential regulatory framework topromote a safe and sound financial system through the expansion of supervisory coverageand authority to prescribe metrics attuned to international standards and practices.The amendment likewise empowers further the BSP to oversee the country’s payment andsettlement systems (PSS) including critical financial market infrastructures that are vitalcomponents of the PSS.Moreover, the amended charter strengthens the central bank’s ability to obtain data from anyperson or entity from the private and public sectors, for policy making and statisticalpurposes, in line with the pursuit of its mandates.The BSP has identified its legislative priorities in the current 18th Congress.We support amendments to the Bank Secrecy Law to better combat tax evasion and moneylaundering.We also have the Financial Consumer Protection Bill to consolidate various consumer protectioninitiatives.And the amendments to Agri-Agra, which are intended to institute agricultural financing reforms,including the expansion of the list of projects and activities that may be financed through bankloans or investments, and broadening of the modes of alternative compliance.In closing, let me leave you with these take-aways.I believe that Philippine economy remains in a position of strength and has built ample buffers toweather volatilities and uncertainties in the global environment.While the Philippines is poised to remain among the fastest-growing economies in the region andin the world, having foresight and being wary of the risks and challenges in the horizon, dictatethat we should not be lulled into complacency. It remains prudent that we balance our optimismwith a certain degree of caution. We assure you that we at the BSP will endeavor to stay aheadof these domestic and external developments and ensure that its monetary policy framework andpolicy agenda remain responsive to the very fluid economic environment.We likewise remain focused on our purpose and steadfast in pursuing continuity, preserving ourcredibility, and in staying committed to undertake bold reforms and continued improvements incarrying out our mandates of price stability, financial stability, and efficient payments andsettlements system. This way, we can truly fulfill our role in navigating the country towards a 6 / 7BIS central bankers' speeches
charted path of sustainable and inclusive economic growth.Again, it is a pleasure to be here this morning. Salamat at mabuhay tayong lahat! 7 / 7BIS central bankers' speeches
Beverly Hirtle: Opening remarks - Heterogeneity Blog SeriesWebinarOpening remarks by Ms Beverly Hirtle, Executive Vice President and Director of Research of theFederal Reserve Bank of New York, for the Heterogeneity Blog Series Webinar, Federal ReserveBank of New York, New York City, 4 March 2020.*   *   *As prepared for deliveryI am delighted to be here today to introduce this webinar about our Liberty Street Economics blogseries on heterogeneity in labor market outcomes. These blogs describe several ways that theforces shaping U.S. labor markets cause the experiences of workers to vary for different cohortsof individuals, including for women as compared to men; for high-wage versus lower-wageworkers; and for workers who face more or less stringent constraints on their ability to borrow.These posts are based on research and analysis being conducted by New York Fed economists,part of continuing efforts by our economists to understand how economic outcomes vary fordifferent groups in the economy. This series follows our inaugural set of posts on heterogeneityin October of last year, in what we hope will be an on-going discussion of work being done at theNew York Fed and elsewhere to understand these important topics.In recent years, we have devoted considerable time and resources here at the New York Fed todevelop data and analytical approaches to gain deeper insights into the experiences of workersand consumers. For instance, we sponsor the Consumer Credit Panel, or CCP, a quarterlyreport on household credit based on a large sample of credit data from Equifax. We have alsodeveloped the Survey of Consumer Expectations, or SCE, a monthly survey of consumerexpectations about inflation, the labor market and household finance. These reports andsummary data are available from the New York Fed’s Center for Microeconomic Data, which canbe accessed on the Bank’s website, newyorkfed.org.Aside from producing these public reports, New York Fed researchers also use the underlyingdata to do detailed econometric analysis, some of which forms the basis of the blog series you’llhear about today. In some cases, we are able to link the CCP, SCE and other data sets to deriveinsights into a wider set of factors affecting workers and consumers, such as educationalattainment, student debt burden, job satisfaction, job transitions, access to credit and housingchoices—and consumer expectations about many of these factors.Why do we do this? Why is it important to generate insights about individual workers rather thanrelying just on analysis of the aggregate data? The first, and most obvious, point is that theaggregate masks the experiences of individuals. Not all workers and consumers experience theeconomy in the same way. Employment, wage and income growth, housing, education, creditand a host of other outcomes vary significantly across different cohorts of individuals and thesedifferences in turn can vary over the business cycle. To understand important economicconcepts like full employment, financial security, productivity growth and the impact of education,it is vital to understand not just the average experience but rather how all cohorts of thepopulation are faring.This understanding is important in and of itself, especially in evaluating the impact of criticaltrends affecting the economy, like technological innovation or demographics, as well as thepolicies intended to respond to the impacts of those trends. We cannot fully understand whetherpolicies have improved social welfare unless we understand how the impact of those policiesvaries across individuals.But understanding heterogeneity is important even if we are just examining policy impact in the 1 / 2BIS central bankers' speeches
aggregate. The most innovative macroeconomic models, those at the frontier of currenteconomic work, recognize heterogeneity across consumers in assessing how monetary andfiscal policy changes are transmitted through the economy. These models incorporateindividuals with different marginal propensities to consume, with different amounts of wealth oraccess to borrowing, or who face different risk exposures, such as the chance they becomeunemployed, over the business cycle. Incorporating these factors can yield quite distinct insightsabout how changes in monetary or fiscal policy can affect growth, employment, wages andinflation. For those who want to know more, we published a blog post on Monday of last weekthat describes the output of just such a model. Regardless of the specific details, the key is thatdifferences across individuals can be important for understanding how the economy works, evenin the aggregate.For all these reasons, the Research group at the New York Fed is committed to continue ourwork on heterogeneity, across several dimensions of what we do. We are always looking forways to expand and deepen our knowledge, to enhance the data that is available to oureconomists and others to do deep, sophisticated research on these topics, and, critically, topublish the work so that we are adding to the store of knowledge both among academicresearchers and among policymakers. We are well-placed to understand what the importantquestions are, to generate the data needed to answer them and to speak to diverse audiencesabout the results. This webinar and blog series are important parts of our strategy forcommunicating about our work and for advancing thought about the critical role thatheterogeneity plays in our economy.Thank you. 2 / 2BIS central bankers' speeches
         Challenges of population ageing from a central bank perspective Public Lecture at the International Center for Monetary and Banking Studies (ICMB), Geneva Pablo Hernández de Cos Governor       03.03.2020  
     1  Good afternoon.   Let me start by thanking Professor Ugo Panizza for his invitation to participate in this public lecture organised by the International Center for Monetary and Banking Studies. I cannot think of a better place to share some thoughts on population ageing and the challenges it poses, in particular from a central bank standpoint.  In my talk I will first describe the process of demographic transformation the world is undergoing. Next, I will shed some light on the challenges that population ageing poses to macroeconomic developments and policies. Finally, I will focus on the implications of an ageing society for the financial system.   The demographic transformation     In recent decades, countries around the globe have been experiencing population ageing, a phenomenon poised to transform the societies and the economies in which we live. Currently, according to the United Nations World Population Prospects, 1 in 11 people in the world is over 65, up from 1 in 20 people back in 1950. Indeed, thirty years hence, projections point to the percentage of people over 65 reaching 16% of the population, in other words 1 in 6 people. The figures are quite telling. Actually, the world demographic structure no longer resembles a population pyramid. Rather, it is turning into a slender tower.  
     2     The scale of the phenomenon is truly unprecedented, yet the causes are well known. There are two main and quite clear reasons behind this demographic transformation. First, the fertility rate has dropped substantially since the second half of the 20th century. Specifically, the number of live births per woman has halved, from 5 in 1950 to 2.5 in 2020. And second, life expectancy has increased dramatically, in parallel with extensive improvements in health and nutrition. While world life expectancy at birth stood at only 47 years in 1950, it exceeds 72 years today. In other words, since 1950 life expectancy has increased by 3.5 years for every decade.   The fall in fertility and the rise in longevity also mean that, in the coming decades, the working age population will grow significantly more slowly than total population. Not only 
     3  that: it is worth noting that in some geographical areas this divergence might become dramatic. For instance, the United Nations (UN) estimates that in Europe the number of deaths has outnumbered that of births since the mid-1990s. As a result, the UN projects that the workforce in Europe will shrink by close to 80 million people from now to 2050. This is equivalent to saying that Europe will lose 1.6 out of 10 workers over the next 30 years.       Note also that this projection already incorporates a positive net inflow of migrants that would offset, to a degree, the labour supply shortage. Specifically, the central scenario of the UN assumes that, in net terms, around 25 million people will come to Europe over the 2020-2050 period. Therefore, a back-of-the-envelope calculation shows that holding the working age population constant would require at least three times the net migration flow assumed in the baseline scenario. Put another way, if Europe were to offset the projected decrease in the working-age population by receiving more migrants, it would need a net influx of around 2.6 million people each year over the next 3 decades, roughly twice the net migration flow Europe has received in the recent past. We cannot overstate the challenges these magnitudes pose from an economic, social and political perspective.    
     4    It is worth stressing that population ageing has become a global phenomenon. A closer look at the cross-country evolution of the old-age dependency ratio, that is, the ratio of the over-65s to the working-age population, is illustrative of this trend. While in 1950 no country in the world featured an old-age dependency ratio above 20%, nowadays 59 countries surpass this level, including all but one European country. In 2050, according to the UN Population Projections, the group of countries with an old-age dependency ratio above 20% will double to 118, comprising most nations in Europe, North America and Asia. Indeed, according to these projections, in some Asian and European countries such as Japan, Korea, Spain and Italy, there will be just 3 working-age individuals for every 2 people over 65 in the year 2050, compared to an average of 11 working-age individuals for every person over 65 in 1950. Even African countries, home to the youngest populations in the world, will see a moderate increase in the dependency ratio in the years to come.  I mentioned earlier that net migration inflows can help sustain the current workforce levels in Europe. However, the obvious fact that migrants become part of the retired population once they reach the retirement age implies that the benefits in terms of old-age dependency ratios are less evident. Its effect will last only to the extent that immigrant flows increase further in future. Hence, we may conclude that the role of migration, when it comes to addressing population ageing as measured by dependency ratios, is probably limited. 
     5   Certainly, we must bear in mind that there is considerable uncertainty over how fertility, mortality and migration flows will evolve in the coming decades. Accordingly, the point estimates of future population levels and dependency ratios must be viewed with some caution. In fact, when the analyses explicitly account for this uncertainty, the results show there is a high degree of variation in the intensity of future population ageing. For example, the scenarios considered by the UN Population Projections, built upon different assumptions on fertility, mortality and migration, suggest that the dependency ratio in Europe could range between 43% and 52% in 2050 and between 35% and 61% in 2070, versus today’s ratio of 29%. In sum, the uncertainty over these demographic projections is sizable, and the more distant the horizon, the greater this uncertainty is.  Yet acknowledging our limited ability to produce precise forecasts about the future should not lead us to trust in the more benign scenarios eventually materialising. In fact, in the realm of demographic projections uncertainty travels in both directions. While some scenarios point to more moderate population ageing, for instance as a result of higher fertility, others suggest that the dependency ratio could be substantially higher than projected in the baseline. In fact, in countries such as Spain and the United Kingdom, it has not been uncommon to under-predict life expectancy in successive projection rounds.   Against this background of demographic change, it is worth examining the multiple effects that an ageing population may exert on the macroeconomy, including the macroeconomic policies that governments and policy-makers implement as a result.           
     6  Macroeconomic implications   Demographic changes come with wide and profound economic consequences. Most relevant for macroeconomic policies are, at least, three such consequences. One is the implication of a smaller and older working-age population for potential growth and inflation. Secondly, economies are undergoing a deep structural change, with economic activity shifting across sectors and occupations, which population ageing might accelerate. Finally, the balance between savings and investment is calling for lower equilibrium interest rates, with strong consequences for the conduct of monetary and fiscal policies.   I will refer to these implications in turn. First, as far as potential growth is concerned, there are several reasons why demography is key. Obviously, a lower growth rate of the working-age population implies lower potential output growth, through a direct effect on labour supply. Additionally, without a significant increase in retirement age, employment rates are likely to be lower since they follow a life cycle pattern, being lower at ages close to retirement.   More interesting and controversial are the implications of population ageing for productivity growth. There are empirical reasons to worry about the negative consequences of an older labour force for productivity growth. Some studies have documented lower innovative activities in firms with older workers. There is also the presumption that in countries with older populations, there is less entrepreneurship. This is not only because older people tend to be less entrepreneurial, but also because younger people themselves are less entrepreneurial in countries with older populations. Whatever confidence we may place in these hypotheses, the fact of the matter is that in advanced countries, even though more resources are devoted to R&D, indicators of innovation such as the number of patents are on a declining trend.    
     7  Admittedly, some new technological developments (such as digitalisation, robotics and artificial intelligence) could be a source of faster productivity growth. And plausibly, population ageing may actually promote automation. But eventually automation can only progress insofar as new ideas (so-called product innovation) emerge.   Whatever the net effect on productivity, with the evidence we now have on the association between demography and growth in advanced economies in recent decades, we should not rule out the possibility that population ageing might significantly decrease potential output growth. Given population projections, extrapolating the observed association into the coming decades yields declines of output growth of about 1 percentage point (pp) until 2030, and close to 2 pp in countries where the demographic transition will accelerate in the years ahead.    And recent observations on productivity growth are not very encouraging. Whatever the measurement used (either labour productivity or total factor productivity) there is a clear productivity slowdown in most advanced economies during the last two decades, even though total factor productivity growth has recovered somewhat in the last one. There is some discussion about to what extent this global productivity trend is due either to miss-measurement, to the delay in the diffusion of the new technologies and of their potential effects, or to more fundamental reasons, such as a slower innovation rate. Nevertheless, we cannot take for granted that productivity growth could compensate for the negative effects of population ageing on potential growth.         
     8   Population ageing may also affect trend inflation. There are several reasons, some, but not all, of them having to do with composition effects in the basket of consumption goods and in employment that may be associated with an older population. First, the consumption basket of young adults includes a higher proportion of expenditure on durable goods and services than that of the older age groups, whose consumption basket includes higher expenditure on non-durable goods and lower expenditure on services, as many of the services they consume are non-market services. Thus population ageing might prompt changes in the relative demand for goods and services. If higher demand is concentrated on goods and services with lower price growth, population ageing would put a certain degree of downward pressure on inflation. Secondly, population ageing tends to increase inflation aversion, insofar as older people who have accumulated more wealth, and are therefore generally net creditors, are more averse to inflation. Thirdly, composition effects in consumption could give rise to changes in the sectoral and occupational composition of employment, increasing the share of employment both in low and highly-skilled occupations and reducing it in medium-skilled occupations, as this is the skills’ pattern required to produce the goods and services in growing demand. Accordingly, demographics could also accelerate the trend towards the polarisation of employment that has been observed since the early 1990s and is usually attributed to technological advances resulting from the automation of routine tasks. Polarisation and the increasing share of low-skill occupations in services may tend to reduce wage pressures. Finally, since wage growth is generally very fast at the start of a person working life, and then quite steady towards the end, it will tend to lessen as the share of the employed population approaching retirement age increases. These deflationary pressures may be strong, although, admittedly, the empirical evidence on the effects of demographic change on the inflation rate is not yet conclusive.            
     9    As for the implications of demographic changes on structural change, the link is also clear. We do not demand the same basket of goods and services over our entire life cycle. Moreover, our comparative advantage at performing across different productive tasks also changes with age. Thus, it will not be surprising to see changes in the sectoral and occupational distribution of economic activity, both through demand and supply channels. The most cited example is the increase in the demand for health and other non-market services, which in Europe are typically provided by the public sector. But there is also a negative association between the weight of the old population and the share of the manufacturing sector, both in GDP and in employment terms. This negative association can be observed across countries and also over time, and does not disappear when other factors, such as stage of development or female labour force participation, are taken into account. Thus, we should be prepared to witness significant changes in the sectoral and occupational composition of economic activity as demographic changes (and the associated technological transformations) accelerate in the coming decades.  
     10  Let me now turn to the implications of demographic changes for the balance of savings and investment and, thus, for the so-called natural rate of interest, something that for obvious reasons is very closely followed by central banks. Savings are likely to increase with population ageing, as people need to devote more resources to retirement. Moreover, the demand for investment is likely to be lower as the population ages, a trend that will also be made more acute by the nature of the technological changes we are witnessing and that seem to require more intangibles and fewer traditional capital goods. No wonder that most estimates point to a significant decrease in the natural rate of interest in recent decades, one closely associated to demographics: among the main factors potentially behind the course of the natural rate (which also include technological growth and changes in risk premia), it is clearly the demographic component that accounts for its low-frequency changes.    This decline in the natural real of interest has significant implications for monetary policy. A low natural real interest rate, together with the deflationary pressures associated with the same demographic and technological factors behind low interest rates, imply a higher probability of nominal policy rates hitting their effective lower bound, or alternatively the so-called reversal rate (i.e. the level below which further rate cuts may become contractionary), thus hampering the ability of conventional monetary policy to stabilise the economy. The strategy review exercises currently taking place at major central banks, and the associated in-depth analyses of the effectiveness of non-conventional measures in this macroeconomic environment, partly reflect the fact that the optimal policy mix for macroeconomic stabilisation might have changed following the decline in equilibrium interest rates.   There are also good reasons to presume that, in this new optimal policy mix, fiscal and macroprudential policies ought to play a bigger role. With lower interest rates and for a given growth rate, the fiscal space is larger, as a given primary deficit leads to a lower public debt ratio in the steady state. There are also arguments supporting the idea that fiscal multipliers might be larger when monetary policy is constrained by the effective lower bound.   
     11  Nevertheless, for this debate, some notes of caution are in order. One source of concern is that not only public debt ratios but also future expenditure commitments are already very high. This is because many public programmes, such as pension systems, will require more funds as the population ages. Another concern is that tax revenues from traditional instruments such as income and consumption taxes may be lower, among other reasons because of the compositional effects associated with lower effective tax rates for older people. Moreover, conventional fiscal stabilisers that rely on progressive income taxation and transfers may become less effective. Since there are good reasons for not relying on discretionary fiscal measures for stabilisation purposes, there might be a need for alternative instruments such as the so-called “semi-automatic stabilisers”. These are fiscal instruments that involve tax reductions or increases in transfers and that automatically come into play as the economy goes into recession. Finally, population ageing might also erode the effectiveness of fiscal multipliers since differences in the marginal propensity to consume over the life cycle make consumption by the old less responsive to fiscal transfers.   As for macroprudential policies, they can also be used as an additional macroeconomic stabilisation mechanism. Indeed, the introduction of macroprudential instruments to complement the stabilising capacity of monetary and fiscal policies is probably one of the most significant advances in the wake of the international financial crisis. For the countries belonging to a monetary union, the introduction of these tools is particularly important. This is because it is one of the few instruments available at the domestic level to ensure the stability of the domestic financial system. In particular, some instruments, such as the countercyclical capital buffer, can be used to build up capital buffers at financial institutions in good times that can be deployed when conditions worsen. The use of macroeconomic stabilisation mechanisms, such as the CCyB1, is particularly significant in a setting, such as the present one, in which monetary policy scope is more limited. A relevant issue in this regard is the extent to which these macropudential measures are complementary or substitutive with respect to monetary policy instruments. For instance, the activation/deactivation of a countercyclical capital buffer may weaken/increase the impact of expansionary monetary policy measures, as it may have a negative/positive impact on credit supply.                                                                                                                1 Countercyclical capital buffer 
     12  Implications for the financial system   Let me now briefly discuss the potential implications of ageing for the financial system. Demographic changes will affect the demand for financial products in various dimensions. First, the demand for credit will diminish due to the reduction in the number of middle-aged individuals since, over the life-cycle, the amount of debt usually peaks at around those ages (in the range of 25 to 34 years), falling to very low levels when the reference person of the household is older than 55.       
     13  Additionally, the demand for long-term financial assets will probably increase since working age individuals will need to build up more savings for retirement, against a background in which public pension income might not be sufficient to smooth consumption in the transition to retirement. The flow of funds data actually show that since the beginning of the 21st century the share of financial assets related to retirement in the financial portfolio of euro area households has increased significantly. In particular, the share of pension entitlements plus life insurance and annuity entitlements has risen by more than ten percentage points.   Currently, the portfolio of euro area households at the age of retirement is tilted towards real estate rather than financial assets, especially in the Mediterranean countries. There are, however, various financial products that can be used to extract liquidity from real estate assets.    
     14   For example, reverse mortgages are loans, guaranteed by the borrower's property, in the form of either a lump sum or a regular income stream until the accumulated debt reaches the loan limit, which is a fraction of the property value. Other forms of reverse mortgages include the possibility for borrowers to borrow funds as they need them up to a pre-agreed limit. Another option is the so-called sale and leaseback contract. In this case the ownership of the dwelling passes to the cash provider who in turn leases the property back to the seller. Some of these products could be combined with annuities, which are insurance products that guarantee an income stream for life. However, in the era of low interest rates the income stream per unit of asset is comparatively low, and tends to decrease even further with the increase in life expectancy.    These changes in the demand for financial products could have implications for the structure of the financial system. The traditional role of banks in their intermediation of funds from short-term deposits to loans may diminish. By contrast, the role of non-banks such as investment funds, pension funds and insurance companies may increase since they are in a better position to offer the products that are in higher demand. As a matter of fact, in recent years non-banks have been increasing their share in the financial system as a result of different factors and not only due to demographic changes. In any case, the financial sector will need to adapt to these changes, offering new products that cater for the needs of the population.  It is worth mentioning that these developments are taking place against a background of low profitability in the banking sectors in many jurisdictions including the euro area, Japan, the United Kingdom and Switzerland. In many cases, the ROE of the banking sector is not only well below levels seen before the crisis but it is also lower than banks’ cost of equity.      
     15   Ageing can also have consequences for the stability of financial systems. A permanent lower level of risk-free interest rates might foster a search for yield by financial intermediaries. On the one hand, this process would leave financial intermediaries and the final investors more exposed to shocks. On the other hand, the valuation of some assets might become too stretched, increasing the risk of sharp adjustments in the future. Against a background of ultra-low interest rates, in recent years some financial intermediaries, such as investment funds, have increased the average maturity of their bond portfolios and their exposure to exchange rate risks.         
     16  Additionally, some segments in the non-bank financial sector exhibit high levels of vulnerability, similar in fact to those witnessed before the crisis. The search for yield may have also fostered an increase in leverage among relatively risky firms. For example, in recent years there has been a dramatic increase at the global level in the volume of lower-rated investment-grade corporate bonds and in the issuance of leverage loans, many of which are distributed in the form of CLOs.   Macroprudential policies are well-equipped to deal with some of these risks. Indeed, the evidence suggests that these policies have been effective in curving financial stability risks. However, most of the existing tools in this area apply only to banks. In a world in which the share of non-banks is increasing, we need to develop new macroprudential tools that can be used to prevent the build-up of systemic risks outside the perimeter of the banking sector.  Conclusions  Let me conclude. We seem to be in a new economic context characterised by older and declining populations, radical technological innovations (but not necessarily much higher productivity growth), high debt and low interest rates. All this entails substantial challenges both for macroeconomic policies and for the financial sector. Central banks will need to redefine not only their strategy but also the toolbox to be used when the constraints on their interest rate policy become binding. Fiscal policies might play a bigger stabilisation role without neglecting the constraints associated with current high debt levels and the implications of demographic changes for the public budget. In both cases, structural policies to expand productivity growth will ease the difficulties associated with the fulfilment by both monetary and fiscal authorities of their stabilisation functions. Macroprudential policies can also be used as additional macroeconomic stabilisation mechanisms, in addition to their role in guaranteeing financial stability. And all of this will have to be achieved while keeping a close eye on financial developments and innovations that will have to meet new demands, mainly to do with the insurance of the longevity risk in an ageing, low-interest-rate world.  
            I would like to thank Jennifer Nemeth for her assistance in drafting these remarks and Jennifer Bell, Sarah Breeden, Alice Carr, Iren Levina, Sini Matikainen and Harriet O’Brien for their input.     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 1        The Road to Glasgow  Speech given by Mark Carney Governor of the Bank of England,  Finance Adviser to the Prime Minister for COP26   Guildhall 27 February 2020   
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 2  2   Introduction Sir David Attenborough’s prophetic introduction has exposed the scale of the challenges and hinted at the enormous opportunities before us.  And the Secretary of State has just described the prospect of a lasting COP 26 legacy and the opportunity for finance to be the force for good we know it can be.   Now is the time to answer these calls to action.  Private finance will have a critical role to play in a successful transition to a net zero carbon economy.  With the UK COP26 Presidency, in partnership with Italy, the world is watching.   Today is all about action.  The actions the private financial sector can take to support a whole economy transition. The actions that regulators, governments and countries will take to catalyse your efforts. The actions that our fellow citizens are demanding, and that future generations deserve. And you have already begun.  Private finance is now increasingly focused on the opportunities and risks in the transition.  Every major systemic bank, the world’s largest insurers, its biggest pension funds and top asset managers are calling for the disclosure of climate-related financial risk through their support of the Taskforce for Climate-related Finance Disclosures (TCFD).1  Investors controlling over $40 trillion in assets (across Climate Action 100+, UN PRI, and the Net Zero Asset Owner Alliance) want to see transition plans to a low carbon world from their portfolio companies.2  This is backed by the critical roles that Multilateral Development Banks, Development Finance Institutions and National Development Banks are playing to accelerate their support to low carbon growth. Achieving net zero will require a whole economy transition—every company, every bank, every insurer and investor will have to adjust their business models. This could turn an existential risk into the greatest commercial opportunity of our time. As the Secretary of State said, finance is the COP 26 deliverable that “makes all the others - adaptation and resilience, nature, energy transition and clean road transport- possible.”  The scale of these requirements are enormous: $3.5 trillion in infrastructure investment alone every year for decades.3  All forms of finance: public, private and blended finance will play a part. Public finance to support a fair and inclusive transition across our economies.  Development and blended finance to support adaptation and resilience.  And mainstream private finance to help all companies realign their business models for net zero.   The objective for the private finance work for COP 26 is simple: ensure that every financial decision takes climate change into account.                                                        1 The full list of current TCFD supporters is available at: https://www.fsb-tcfd.org/tcfd-supporters/. 2 See https://www.unpri.org/signatories, http://www.climateaction100.org/investors, https://www.unepfi.org/net-zero-alliance/. 3 https://www.iea.org/news/deep-energy-transformation-needed-by-2050-to-limit-rise-in-global-temperature. 
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 3  3   To do so, we will work with you – the private sector – to put in place the frameworks so that you can do what you do best – allocate capital to manage risks and seize opportunities across the economy.  Determining who’s ready for the transition and who’s not requires:  1. Disclosure of climate financial risk to become comprehensive; 2. Climate risk management to be transformed; and  3. Investing for a net-zero world to go mainstream. On the road to Glasgow, we will focus on the three Rs: reporting; risk management; and return - to help unlock the private financial flows that are vital to the transition.  This will support a wider shift to Paris alignment and be underpinned by public finance efforts to deliver $100bn. To succeed we will need your support and your action.  We will publish the strategy and how you can get involved when I formally assume my new roles, but following Sir David’s lead, I wanted to offer you an exclusive preview today.  Reporting: improving the quantity and quality of climate-related disclosures by implementing a common framework built on TCFD An old adage is that which is measured can be managed.   For COP 26 we want you to help refine and implement TCFD disclosure; and we will work with authorities to commit to pathways to make climate reporting mandatory. We will build on existing good work.  Catalysed by the G20 and the Paris COP, the private sector has already led the development of a framework for climate financial reporting through the TCFD.4  The TCFD has become the go-to standard for consistent, comparable and decision-useful and efficient information.  It is comprehensive, encompassing recommendations on governance, strategy and risk management, as well as metrics and targets.5  And most importantly, it represents the best views of the private sector of what is decision useful, capturing the opinions of both the companies that must access finance and of the providers of capital from across the financial system.                                                         4 The 2017 recommendations report is available at https://www.fsb-tcfd.org/publications/final-recommendations-report/. 5 The TCFD is the only reporting framework to all each of these strands for both banks and investors: https://carbonaccountingfinancials.com/files/downloads/Overview-Initiatives-Shaping-Climate-Action-Journey-for-FIs.pdf. 
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 4  4   The TCFD has widespread public backing from across the financial sector.6  Every major systemic bank, nine of the ten top asset managers, all the credit rating agencies, all major accounting firms and shareholder advisory firms back the TCFD.  In January this year, the International Business Council (IBC) of 140 CEOs published a report on a common set of metrics that IBC members signed up to, which included TCFD.7  And the UNPRI announced that all 2,275 signatories must make TCFD disclosures or risk ejection from the group.  The institutions like yours will be the main users of this information.  You have the opportunity to shape these disclosures as they become market standards.  We encourage the private sector to: 1. Contribute to the review of the current TCFD framework that Mary Schapiro is leading. Tell her what’s important, what’s less so, what should be refined to ensure disclosures are decision-useful, comparable, consistent and efficient before they become mandatory. 2. Commit to reporting a full set of TCFD disclosures in the 2021/22 reporting round: The self-help community for TCFD is considerable. Through multi-sector TCFD summits and more focused TCFD industry preparer forums, companies can continue to share knowledge to improve disclosure practices.8  Full disclosure encompasses scope 1, 2 and 3 emissions and includes a strategy for managing these down, embedded through appropriate board-level governance structures and linking outcomes to compensation.9   3. Demand TCFD-consistent disclosures from your borrowers and the portfolio companies. In the process, you will unleash tremendous value and be better able to manage embedded risks.   For COP 26 we will work to develop pathways, in consultation with international standard setters - such as the FSB, IFRS and IOSCO – and national authorities to determine the best approaches to making climate disclosure mandatory.  Risk management: ensuring firms and investors can measure and manage the risks in the transition to a net zero world. The second step on the path to a sustainable financial system is better climate risk management. Managing climate-related financial risks requires disclosure to go beyond the static (a company’s carbon footprint today) to the strategic (their plans to manage down their emissions). Risk management means assessing the forward-looking disclosures to judge the resilience of firms’ strategies to the transition.                                                        6 The full list of current TCFD supporters is available at: https://www.fsb-tcfd.org/tcfd-supporters/. 7 https://www.weforum.org/press/2020/01/measuring-stakeholder-capitalism-world-s-largest-companies-support-developing-core-set-of-universal-esg-disclosures/. 8 https://www.wbcsd.org/Programs/Redefining-Value/External-Disclosure/TCFD. 9 Scope 1 means all direct emissions from the activities of an organisation.  Scope 2 means indirect emissions from electricity purchased and used by the organisation.  Scope 3 means all other Indirect emissions from activities of the organisation, occurring from sources that they do not own or control.  
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 5  5   To this end, the Bank of England will become the first regulator to stress test its major banks and insurers against different climate pathways, including the catastrophic business-as-usual scenario, the ideal - but still challenging - transition to net zero by 2050, and the late policy action - or climate Minsky moment – scenario that could bring a sudden recognition of the scale of stranded assets and the economy-wide disruption that a delayed and disorderly transition will bring.10 Our stress test of the world’s leading international financial centre will show how major financial firms expect to adjust their business models, as well as the potential collective impact of these responses on the wider economy. The stress test will reveal the financial firms - and by extension the companies - that are preparing for the transition, and it will expose those that have not. The Bank’s stress test will build on the scenarios being developed by the Network for Greening the Financial System (NGFS) – a coalition of over 50 central banks, representing half of the world’s emissions.11  This spring, the NGFS will make these scenarios open source and publicly available, so that any company, in any sector, can use them to assess their strategic resilience.   To embed climate-risk management, we’re encouraging the financial sector and our international peers to:  1. Help shape the climate stress testing framework, which Sam Woods will describe later this morning, by sharing your expertise and responding to the approach that the Bank has put forward in its discussion paper.12 2. Start building capability within your firms. Expertise in managing the physical and transition risks associated with climate change will be a core competency for banks and insurers.   3. Share knowledge and expertise. Climate risk management is a nascent field, and we all need rapidly to improve our skills.  That’s why the Bank and the FCA have established the Climate Financial Risk Forum (CFRF) to publish the sector’s collective view of risk management and scenario analysis best practice.13 4. Run stress tests in other jurisdictions.  Already, 15 other authorities have committed to run stress tests.  Through the NGFS, the Bank of England will share our experience so that others can conduct stress tests for their own financial systems.  This will help improve and refine the methodology.                                                        10 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/2019/december/boe-consults-on-proposals-for-stress-testing-the-financial-stability-implications-of-climate-change. 11 https://www.banque-france.fr/en/financial-stability/international-role/network-greening-financial-system. 12 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/paper/2019/biennial-exploratory-scenario-climate-change-discussion-paper. 13 CFRF members include banks, insurers, asset managers, and other organisations with a strong interest. The working groups include industry groups to ensure a wide range of views is reflected.  https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/climate-change/climate-financial-risk-forum. 
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 6  6   5. Embed assessment of climate risks into financial stability analysis:  where the FSB is taking forward work, drawing on the advances made by its members as well as the NGFS.14 Return: helping firms and investors identify the opportunities in the transition to net zero. The transition to net zero will affect every sector of our economies, and all companies that are transitioning to net zero should be encouraged.   In parallel, with people increasingly demanding climate action, asset owners and managers will need to disclose whether their clients’ money is being invested in line with their values—a point Richard Curtis will make much more eloquently and forcefully later this morning.  Thus far, the approaches to doing so have been inadequate.  ESG metrics—while worthy—are dominated by the S and the G.  Carbon footprints are not forward-looking. And the impact of shareholder engagement is hard to measure.  Moreover, a whole economy transition isn’t about funding only deep green activities or blacklisting dark brown ones.  We need fifty shades of green to catalyse and support all companies towards net zero and be able to assess collectively whether we’re “Paris aligned”. Given that net zero is both an imperative of climate physics and a commitment by 120 countries; companies, banks, insurers, pension funds and investors will increasingly be expected to develop and disclose their transition plans.  For companies that could mean:  Commitment to a net zero target (for scope 1, 2 and ideally scope 3 emissions) by a specific date;  Assessment and disclosure of how the transition to a net zero business model will impact strategy;  Short term milestones to track progress; and  Details of governance, including whether executive compensation is tied to success and how risks are managed at the board level. In turn, there are several possible ways for the providers of capital to assess the level of preparedness for the transition.  To support the assessment of who is on the right side of history and therefore presents the most promising investment opportunities in the transition, providers of capital could measure and disclose: 1. The percentage of assets that comply with TCFD disclosure; 2. The percentage of assets that are Net Zero-aligned (“Paris aligned”);                                                         14 See e.g. Giuzio, M. et al. (2019), Climate change and financial stability in the Financial Stability Review of the European Central Bank, May 2019; and Piera de Silva, L. A. (2019) Research on climate-related risks and financial stability: An "epistemological break"?, speech at at the Conference of the Central Banks and Supervisors Network for Greening the Financial System (NGFS), Paris, 17 April 2019. 
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 7  7   3. Progress on transition as assessed against industry-specific transition pathways to help identify the leaders and laggards in the transition; and 4. Degree warming potential of the portfolio, which assesses the quality of transition plans relative to the Paris goals. Firms such as Aviva, Axa and Allianz have already voluntarily disclosed this information.  They are now feeding into a TCFD group that is considering whether the warming potential, or any other metric, is the best way to measure the potential opportunities in the transition.  For COP 26, we intend to leverage the success of existing groups and coalitions, like the Net Zero Asset Owner alliance, Climate Action 100+ and the UN PRI to build a large coalition of asset owners and asset managers who expect their portfolio companies to become Net Zero aligned.  MDBs and Innovative Finance The work on reporting, risk and returns will put in place the foundations for private finance to help drive the transition to net zero, but much more must be done across the full spectrum of the financial sector.  Multilateral Development Banks and Development Finance Institutions have essential roles in mobilising blended finance for adaptation, resilience and mitigation, especially in the communities most exposed to the devastating effects of climate change.  As the Secretary of State noted, we will be asking these institutions to develop robust implementation plans for Paris Alignment in the run up to COP26. We will also consider how to best channel the expertise, experience and ingenuity of the financial sector to develop innovative approaches to meet the biggest challenges in the transition to net zero. This will mean: 1. Understanding which new financial products, such as transition bonds and transition indices, can make a real difference to climate finance and support efforts to scale them up rapidly as needed. 2. Promoting the most promising climate innovations in insurance sector, such as contingent liability structures for climate policy risk and micro- insurance in emerging economies, drawing on the leadership of organisations such as the CCRI and IDF; and  3. Evaluating the prospects for private markets in carbon offsets and nature-based solutions, drawing on the sector’s expertise in creating and running efficient and transparent market infrastructure.  Conclusion  With sustainable finance moving from CSR to the C suite, the UK COP 26 Presidency in partnership with Italy will help build the foundations of a system that will be able to seize the opportunities of transitioning to net zero. 
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 8  8   The UK has been at the forefront of innovation for centuries.  It was the birthplace of the industrial revolution that brought unimagined progress.  The City financed the steam engines, the railroads and the new energy sources that powered this transformation. And now – on the cusp of the sustainable revolution – the world once again needs your innovation, resources and leadership.  Your actions can reinforce and amplify the efforts of development finance institutions, MDBs, and local and national governments spanning 195 countries.  Join the world on the road to Glasgow, and help create a path to a sustainable world.   
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 9  9    
John C Williams: A different kind of recessionRemarks (via videoconference) by Mr John C Williams, President and Chief Executive Officer ofthe Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at the Institute of International Finance: Central Bankingin the Age of COVID-19 Summit, 30 June 2020.*   *   *As prepared for deliveryThank you for the warm introduction. When the United States entered the pandemic in March, Inever expected that three and a half months later I would still be making speeches from myapartment: I look forward to the day when gathering in groups is safe and we can meet in person.We're now 17 weeks into a catastrophic pandemic which has cost over 500,000 lives worldwideand has had a devastating effect on economies across the globe.Today I'm going to talk about the current state of the U.S. economy, our goals for the recovery,and how the Federal Reserve is responding to the worst recession in living memory.Before I continue, let me give the usual disclaimer that the views I express are mine alone and donot necessarily reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee or anyone else in theFederal Reserve System.A Different Kind of RecessionThe economic effects of the coronavirus have caused great hardship and created enormousuncertainty. The root of this downturn—a global pandemic—means this is a completely differentkind of recession compared to anything we've experienced in the past.As the pandemic unfolds, many people are starting to ask questions about our economic future:What will the recovery look like? When will it begin? And how will it be affected by the virus?It's easiest to start with the last of these questions first. The virus will continue to be at centerstage throughout the economic recovery. We are traveling down a narrow path, balancing areturn of economic activity with effective containment of COVID-19.The overall unemployment rate reached nearly 15 percent in April, and around 20 millionAmericans have lost their jobs—numbers I hoped I would never see in my lifetime. These figuresunderstate the full extent of the pandemic's toll on the economy.The pandemic and the ensuing economic downturn have done disproportionate harm tocommunities of color. Black and Hispanic families, as well as lower-wage workers, have sufferedthe most. Those who least can afford it have been hardest hit, making a strong and fulleconomic recovery of paramount importance.As the recent surge in cases in some states demonstrates, much is still unknown about how thepandemic will play out in the months ahead. That said, there have been signs that we may bepast the worst of the extreme economic distress, and early indications of a recovery have startedto emerge.As states began to open up and people returned to eating in restaurants and shopping in storeswe've seen sizable increases in consumer spending. We've also seen increases in buildingpermits, signaling a turnaround in the construction industry. People have been getting back towork and the unemployment rate has started to edge down. Although this improvement iswelcome, the economy is still far from healthy and a full recovery will likely take years to achieve.123 1 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
One of the things that's been unique about this recession is the lightning speed of events.Traditional macroeconomic data sources—like the labor market report and GDP—are publishedwith lags of weeks or months and don't typically allow one to see the changes within the monthor quarter.In response, economists at the Federal Reserve and elsewhere have increasingly turned toanalyzing a wide variety of high-frequency data, which—as the name suggests—are publisheddaily or weekly, with only short reporting lags. High-frequency data give us more timely andgranular information about what's going on in the economy in between the standard macro datareleases. They also help us paint a more detailed picture of people's behavior and how it'schanging in the midst of unprecedented circumstances.These data tell us whether small businesses are hiring and whether people are eating inrestaurants, staying in hotels, and boarding airplanes. When states started to reopen, signs fromboth the standard macro data and the high-frequency granular data have been encouraging.Together, they indicate that we've likely seen the low point of the downturn and that the overalleconomy has begun to recover.Even in New York, the hardest hit state, we have seen initial signs of a turnaround. Surveys ofmanufacturing and services firms rebounded significantly in June, following record lows in Apriland May, and revenues of small businesses in New York have gradually picked up as well. In contrast to these positive signs, we are seeing some indications of a slowing in the pace ofrecovery in states that are currently experiencing large-scale outbreaks. This is a valuablereminder that the economy's fate is inextricably linked to the path of the virus. A strong economicrecovery depends on effective and sustained containment of COVID-19.Turning to the question of what the goals for recovery are: one measure of success is a return tothe sustained growth and historically low unemployment that we had attained before thepandemic. I know this seems a long way from where we are today and may seem unreachableduring these darkest days of the recession. But history teaches us that the economy can getback to full strength, even after deep downturns.Policy ResponsesThe unique nature of this recession and the uncertainty that comes with it mean that the policyresponses—public health, fiscal, and by the Fed—need to be designed to reflect the nature of thepandemic and the challenges it poses to the economy. Although I will focus on events in theUnited States, it is important to stress that this is a global health and economic crisis. Most othercountries are facing similar challenges and are likewise engaged in a range of policy actions.Our economic prospects are tied to our ability to contain the spread of the virus, care for thosewho fall ill, and develop effective treatments. In addition, fiscal policy has played a criticallyimportant role in providing financial support to families, small businesses, and those who are outof work during the crisis. This timely support contributed greatly to the rebound in consumerspending and jobs that we have seen over the past two months.The Federal Reserve has taken rapid and significant actions to stabilize critical parts of ourfinancial system and to support the flow of credit, thereby helping position the economy for astrong and sustained return to maximum employment and price stability.In March, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) brought the target range for the federalfunds rate to near zero. The FOMC has indicated that it expects to keep interest rates at thislevel until it is confident that the economy has weathered recent events and is on track to achieveits maximum employment and price stability goals.4567 2 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
Bringing interest rates down to near zero makes it easier for households and businesses to meettheir borrowing needs and fosters favorable financial conditions that will help promote a reboundin spending and investment.In addition, the Fed has been conducting large-scale repo operations and purchasing sizablequantities of U.S. Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities to support marketfunctioning at a time of extraordinary volatility in markets. These actions averted a potentialshutdown in the availability of credit, which would have made the current economic crisis evenmore severe.Although functioning in financial markets has improved since March, the Federal Reserve hasindicated that it will continue to increase asset holdings to sustain smooth market functioning,thereby fostering effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financial conditions.In addition to stabilizing financial markets, the Federal Reserve has instituted a number ofprograms to support the flow of credit to households, businesses, and state and localgovernments. These actions will enable them to continue to do their work, both now and whennormal life resumes.Taken together, these programs have helped restore the functioning of financial markets, fosterfavorable financial conditions, and support the continued flow of credit to businesses andhouseholds.ConclusionI'll conclude with this: This pandemic and this recession form a pivotal moment for the FederalReserve. We are seeing signs that the economy has started to recover. Still, the economicoutlook remains highly uncertain and it's going to take considerable time to restore the economyto its full potential. But rest assured, we are committed to using our full range of tools to supportthe economy and bring about a full and robust recovery.COVID-19 Dashboard by the Center for Systems Science and Engineering at Johns Hopkins University,accessed June 29, 2020.The impact on lower-wage workers is analyzed in Cajner, Tomaz, L.D. Crane, R. A. Decker, J. Grigsby, A.Hamins-Puertolas, E. Hurst, C. Kurz, and A Yildirmaz., 2020. “The U.S. Labor Market During the Beginning of thePandemic Recession.” Becker Friedman Institute, University of Chicago, Working Paper, No. 2020–58 (June).U.S. Census Bureau and Department of Housing and Urban Development, Monthly New ResidentialConstruction, May 2020, June 17, 2020.An example at the New York Fed is the bi-weekly publication of the Weekly Economic Index.Empire State Manufacturing Survey, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, June 2020; Business Leaders Survey,Federal Reserve Bank of New York, June 2020. The data on small business revenue come from Womply, asoftware-as-a-service provider focused on customer relationship management.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement, March 3,2020; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement, March15, 2020.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement, April 29,2020; See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement, June10, 2020.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Announces Extensive New Measuresto Support the Economy, March 23, 2020.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement, June 10,8910123456789 3 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
2020.For announcements of the various programs, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, FederalReserve Board Announces Establishment of a Commercial Paper Funding Facility (CPFF) to Support the Flowof Credit to Households and Businesses, March 17, 2020; Board of Governors of the Federal ReserveSystem, Federal Reserve Board Announces Establishment of a Primary Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF) to Supportthe Credit Needs of Households and Businesses, March 17, 2020; Board of Governors of the Federal ReserveSystem, Federal Reserve Board Broadens Program of Support for the Flow of Credit to Households andBusinesses by Establishing a Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility (MMLF), March 18, 2020; Board ofGovernors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Announces Extensive New Measures to Support theEconomy, March 23, 2020; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Will Establish aFacility to Facilitate Lending to Small Businesses via the Small Business Administration’s Paycheck ProtectionProgram (PPP) By Providing Term Financing Backed by PPP Loans, April 6, 2020; and Board of Governors of theFederal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Takes Additional Actions to Provide Up to $2.3 Trillion in Loans toSupport the Economy, April 9, 2020.10 4 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
 The Federal Reserve’s Pandemic Response - FEDERAL RESERVE BANK of NEW YORKhttps://www.newyorkfed.org/newsevents/speeches/2020/hel2006251/4As prepared for deliverySPEECHThe Federal Reserve’s Pandemic ResponseJune 25, 2020Michael Held, Executive Vice President and General CounselRemarks at Union of Arab Banks Webinar: Global Banking in Light of COVID-19 and Geopolitical Development (delivered viavideoconference)Thank you. It's an honor to join you. And, as a central banker, it is a special privilege to speak alongside the Governors of theCentral Bank of Egypt and the Central Bank of Tunisia. My topics today are the Federal Reserve's response to the COVID-19pandemic and the challenges that lie ahead. As always, the views I express are my own, not necessarily those of the FederalReserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System.Pandemic Work of the Federal ReserveThe challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic are daunting. On a personal level, we fear for the health and livelihoods of ourselvesand our loved ones. On a professional level, our organizations face existential challenges largely beyond our creation or control. Ona societal level, we see how injustice and inequality have reduced confidence in public institutions and increased polarization—right when we most need to come together.To do its part, the Federal Reserve has committed to "us[e] its full range of tools to support households, businesses, and the U.S.economy overall in this challenging time."The Federal Open Market Committee lowered the target range for the federal funds rate to 0 to ¼ percent and increasedpurchases of Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities.The Board of Governors created new dollar liquidity arrangements with central banks, reflecting the global nature of the pandemicand its economic disruption. Together with other Federal banking agencies, the Board issued regulatory relief and guidance tobanks encouraging them to meet the changing needs of customers, to use their capital and liquidity buffers to facilitate lending,and to access the discount window.Perhaps most prominently, the Fed has used its emergency powers in Section 13 of the Federal Reserve Act to establish programsand facilities to keep the economy running. The Board of Governors created the Primary Dealer Credit Facility, the CommercialPaper Funding Facility, and the Money Market Liquidity Facility to provide relief for critical wholesale markets. Anotherfacility supports lending to small businesses via the Small Business Administration's Paycheck Protection Program. Twocommercial credit facilities provide liquidity for corporate bonds. The Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility supports themarkets for student loans, auto loans, and credit card loans. The Municipal Liquidity Facility helps state and local governmentsand agencies close revenue gaps. And facilities specifically targeting "Main Street" help sustain retail businesses and mayexpand to assist nonprofit institutions.For the last several months, implementing the Board of Governors' relief initiatives has been the priority of the New York Fed andour sister Reserve Banks. As my colleague Daleep Singh has said, we have adhered to three principles: robust and proactivetransparency, strong and effective corporate governance, and accountability to our stakeholders. The New York Fed's staff hasworked hard—and sometimes around the clock—to give effect to these principles. I am proud of my colleagues, and continue to behumbled and inspired by their deep knowledge of their fields, their brilliant creativity, and their selfless commitment to the Fed'smission—notwithstanding many personal hardships.Reflections on the Fed's Pandemic ResponseThe Fed's work is ongoing, but it is worth pausing to reflect on lessons learned from our experience so far.The extent of the Fed's efforts raises legitimate questions about the role of the nation's central bank. Some "Fed watchers" haveopined that the Fed "has effectively shifted from lender of last resort for banks to a commercial banker of last resort for thebroader economy."I don't know if I would go that far.The "lender of last resort" function—framed definitively by Walter Bagehot in the late nineteenth century—is not the FederalReserve's only purpose. As I mentioned earlier, the Fed's job is to support the "U.S. economy overall." The Fed's monetary policy12345678910111213141516171819
 The Federal Reserve’s Pandemic Response - FEDERAL RESERVE BANK of NEW YORKhttps://www.newyorkfed.org/newsevents/speeches/2020/hel2006252/4mandate, for example, addresses the national employment and inflation objectives. The Fed runs a payment system, FedWire, onwhich the global economy depends for clearing U.S. dollar transactions. And the Fed regulates and supervises financialinstitutions so that, each and together, they safely match savers and borrowers in the real economy.I sometimes think that theories or expectations of central banking depart from reality. This may be unavoidable. The best theoriesare simple. The reality of central banking is complicated. The Fed is a complex entity governed by numerous statutes that havechanged many times in the last 100 years—and are still changing. The Federal Reserve is not just a concept. It is a creation ofCongress. Its job is what Congress tells it to do—to adhere as closely as possible to the will of Congress.Of course, Congress's instructions sometimes leave room for interpretation and discretion. For example, Section 13(3) of theFederal Reserve Act allows the Board of Governors to provide credit during "unusual and exigent circumstances." What are those?And how do we know when circumstances cease to be unusual and exigent? Theories can help resolve these ambiguities and guidethe judgment of policymakers.Other times, Congress is clear, but its instructions do not fit neatly into theories of central banking. In designing its Section 13(3)facilities, the Board of Governors coordinated its policy decisions with the Department of the Treasury. This was required by law.In the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, Congress required the Board of Governors to consult withthe Secretary of the Treasury on regulations to implement its emergency powers. It also required that the Board of Governorsobtain the approval of the Secretary of the Treasury before extending emergency credit.To some extent, the Dodd-Frank Act codified reality. The Board of Governors and the Department of the Treasury worked closelythroughout the Financial Crisis of 2008. But Congress formalized a degree of cooperation that can make it hard to draw atheoretical line between monetary and fiscal authority—or between an independent agency and a political department.I should add that this working relationship between our country's monetary and fiscal authorities deepened following theCoronavirus Aid, Recovery and Economic Stimulus Act—known as the "CARES Act." That statute appropriated roughly $2 trillionin economic relief. Congress sent about a quarter of that money to the Treasury for investments in Federal Reserve programs andfacilities.I look forward, in the fullness of time, to more theoretical discussions about the proper role of a central bank in administeringemergency economic relief. Some of this dialogue has already begun. Questions that catch my interest include:What should be the guiding principles and constraints on the design and establishment of 13(3) facilities?How should we think about moral hazard and the long term effect of the use of the Federal Reserve's Section 13(3) powers onthe evolution of financial markets and the economy, as well as official sector responses to future economic crises?In responding to a crisis, how should the official sector best calibrate its lending response through the central bank, compared toits spending response through the fiscal authorities?And, in an emergency like the COVID-19 pandemic, where should decisions about the allocation of resources in the economyrest? If independence is prized in allocating emergency aid, should there be a new, independent agency with responsibility foreconomic investment?These are interesting theoretical questions. In practice, however, the Federal Reserve is what Congress has made it. Itscoordination with Treasury and its administration of economic relief proceed as Congress has directed.Looking AheadI would like to leave you with some observations on challenges still ahead of us—in the near term, medium term, and long term.Near-term challenges—those arising within the next twelve months—are many. To manage them, I commend to you Martin Wolf'sadvice: "Above all, make sure we get through this. That is our chief aim."Like many of you, I have confronted new legal and compliance questions arising from a remote workforce, and have had to balancenew priorities against ongoing commitments. To get through this, we have to do both. We have to walk and chew gum at the sametime.Financial institutions have to sustain—and, in some cases, improve—cyber security and anti-money laundering programs. Thepandemic is no excuse to lower your guard. If anything, there is a heightened need for cyber vigilance. Many Federal agencies havepublished warnings of pandemic scams aimed at financial institutions and their customers. Among other schemes, hackers anddigital con-artists may try to exploit the realities of the "digital divide." Employees and customers without regular internet accessat home may resort to connecting from public places. There are inherent risks to viewing or printing confidential informationoutside of secure locations. Those risks could be magnified in the decentralized environments that now count as our places ofbusiness.20212223242526
The Federal Reserve’s Pandemic Response - FEDERAL RESERVE BANK of NEW YORKhttps://www.newyorkfed.org/newsevents/speeches/2020/hel2006253/4In the medium term—by that I mean over the next couple of years—we need to anticipate the next wave of legal and economicchallenges from the pandemic. At the front of my mind is the ongoing transition away from LIBOR. Trillions of dollars in globalfinancial assets depend on LIBOR. This pandemic has shown us the importance of contingency planning. Just because a globalcrisis has been going on does not mean December 2021 will never come.LIBOR is a known problem with workable solutions. Other challenges, like the volatility of pricing in the oil market, are moreuncertain. The current lack of energy consumption is linked, in large part, to whether people feel safe. But when will we feel safeagain?We also need to consider the cumulative impact of lost jobs, lost customers, and lost tax revenue on households, businesses,and governments. Will they run out of money? If so, when? And what happens then? What will be the scale of defaults andbankruptcies? A group of academics recently alerted Congress to capacity limitations in our bankruptcy courts. Delays created bycapacity limitations could lead to more liquidations of companies that might otherwise restructure and survive. It is important thatall potential participants in bankruptcy proceedings anticipate challenges of overextended courts.Longer term—say, in the next two to five years—one of my concerns is the role of non-bank financial institutions in the economy.In April, the International Monetary Fund warned about the exposure of non-bank financial institutions to credit risk as a result ofthe pandemic. I worry about how that exposure will affect regulated banks and the real economy—and whether we havesufficient information to assess that impact. Going forward, we may want to consider whether the regulatory perimeter should beexpanded to provide greater transparency into non-bank financial companies.In addition, I wonder how changes to the workplace and the workforce will affect culture within financial services firms. JohnWilliams, the New York Fed's President and CEO, has observed that it is easy to talk about values and integrity when revenues areflush. Living up to those standards becomes more difficult—and more important—when making a profit is harder. Remoteworkspaces add to this challenge. Successful organizations depend on "open doors" to maintain transparency and build trust. Butwhat will "open doors" mean to people in future digital work environments? How will the culture of a workplace change if we don'tsee each other face-to-face as often? In particular, how will we effectively train and mentor junior employees?Finally, current events demand that we be honest about the times we have not lived up to our own standards of equal justice underlaw and equal opportunity in our economy. Each of us needs to question our role in allowing systemic racism to persist. Ourcolleagues, stakeholders, and the public in general will ask how we will do better in the near term and the long term—and thenthey will hold us to it.Thank you for your kind attention, and thank you again to the Union of Arab Banks for hosting this discussion. Lisa Kraidin, Thomas M. Noone, Sean O'Malley, and summer intern Gabe Rosen contributed to the preparation of these remarks. Board of Governors, "Federal Reserve announces extensive new measures to support the economy," Press release (Mar. 23, 2020). Federal Open Market Committee Statement (Mar. 15, 2020). See supra n.2. See also Nicola Cetorelli, Linda S. Goldberg, and Fabiola Ravazzolo, "How Fed Swap Lines Supported U.S. Corporate Credit Market amid COVID-19 Strains,"Liberty Street Economics (June 12, 2020). "Agencies encourage financial institutions to meet financial needs of customers and members affected by coronavirus," Joint press release (Mar. 9, 2020). "Federal banking agencies provide banks additional flexibility to support households and businesses," Joint press release (Mar. 17, 2020). "Federal banking agencies encourage banks to use Federal Reserve discount window," Joint press release (Mar. 16, 2020). 12 U.S.C. § 343. Information of the Primary Dealer Credit Facility ("PDCF") is available on the Board of Governors' public website and the New York Fed's public website. See also AntoineMartin and Susan McLaughlin, "The Primary Dealer Credit Facility," Liberty Street Economics (May 19, 2020). Information on the Commercial Paper Funding Facility ("CPFF") is available on the Board of Governors' public website and the New York Fed's public website. See alsoNina Boyarchenko, Richard Crump, and Anna Kovner, "The Commercial Paper Funding Facility," Liberty Street Economics (May 15, 2020). Information on the Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility ("MMLF") is available on the Board of Governors' public website. See also Marco Cipriani, Gabriele LaSpada, Reed Orchinik, and Aaron Plesset, "The Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility," Liberty Street Economics (May 8, 2020). Information on the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility ("PPPLF") is available on the Board of Governors' website. See also Haoyang Liu and Desi Volker, "ThePaycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility," Liberty Street Economics (May 20, 2020). Information on the Primary Market Corporate Credit Facility and Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facility is available on the Board of Governors' public website. Seealso Nina Boyarchenko, Richard Crump, Anna Kovner, Or Shachar, and Peter Van Tassel, "The Primary and Secondary Market Credit Facilities," Liberty Street Economics(May 26, 2020). Information on the Term Asset-Backed Securities Lending Facility ("TALF") is available on the Board of Governors' public website and the New York Fed's public website. Information on the Federal Reserve's Municipal Lending Facility ("MLF") is available on the Board of Governors' public website. See also Andrew F. Haughwout, BenjaminG. Hyman, and Matthew Lieber, "Helping State and Local Governments Stay Liquid," Liberty Street Economics (Apr. 10, 2020). Information on the Federal Reserve's Main Street Lending Program is available on the Board of Governors' public website and the public website of the Federal ReserveBank of Boston.2728293031323312345678910111213141516
 The Federal Reserve’s Pandemic Response - FEDERAL RESERVE BANK of NEW YORKhttps://www.newyorkfed.org/newsevents/speeches/2020/hel2006254/4 Board of Governors, "Federal Reserve Board announces it will be seeking public feedback on proposal to expand its Main Street Lending Program to provide access to creditfor nonprofit organizations," Press release (June 15, 2020). Daleep Singh, "Implementing the Fed's Facilities: Moving at Maximum Speed with Maximum Care" (Apr. 17, 2020). Michael Feroli, "Fallout from COVID-19: Global Recession, Zero Interest Rates and Emergency Policy Actions" (Mar. 27, 2020). 12 U.S.C. § 343(3)(B)(i). Id. at § 343(3)(B)(iv). See, e.g., Lev Menand, "Unappropriated Dollars: The Fed's Ad Hoc Lending Facilities and the Rules That Govern Them," Law Working Paper No. 518/220 (May 2020). See Robert C. Hockett & Saule T. Omarova, "Private Wealth and Public Goods: A Case for a National Investment Authority," 43 J. Corp. L. 437 (2018). Martin Wolf, "Monetary financing demands careful and sober management," Financial Times (Apr. 9, 2020). See Financial Crimes Enforcement Network ("FinCEN"), "The Financial Crimes Enforcement Network Provides Further Information to Financial Institutions in Responseto the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Pandemic," Press release (Apr. 3, 2020) ("Compliance with the Bank Secrecy Act (BSA) remains crucial to protecting ournational security by combating money laundering and related crimes, including terrorism and its financing. FinCEN expects financial institutions to continue following a risk-based approach, and to diligently adhere to their BSA obligations."). See, e.g., FinCEN, "FinCEN Issues Advisory on Medical Scams Related to COVID-19 and Companion Notice Providing Filing Instructions for Financial Institutions," Pressrelease (May 18, 2020); Financial Institution Regulatory Authority ("FINRA"), "FINRA Reminds Firms to Beware of Fraud During the Coronavirus (COVID-19) Pandemic,"Regulatory Notice 20-13 (May 5, 2020); U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC"), "SEC Charges Microcap Fraud Scheme Participants Attempting to Capitalize onthe COVID-19 Pandemic," Press release (June 11, 2020). See also Jennifer Achilles and Alejo Cabranes, "Banks May Need to Update Policies to Fight COVID-19 Fraud,"Law360.com (June 16, 2020) (discussing the role of banks in identifying medical fraud in light of FinCEN advisory). See Randall K. Quarles, Letter to G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors (Apr. 11, 2020) ("The financial stability risks that would be associated with anunsuccessful transition away from LIBOR are as relevant in the current environment as they were before."); Michael Held, "SOFR and the Transition from LIBOR" (Feb. 26,2019). See AnnaMaria Andriotis, "Americans Skip Millions of Loan Payments as Coronavirus Takes Economic Toll," Wall Street Journal (June 19, 2020); Anna Zabai, "How arehousehold finances holding up against the COVID-19 shock?" BIS Bulletin No. 22 (June 15, 2020). See Board of Governors, Monetary Policy Report (June 12, 2020) at 23 ("Importantly, some small businesses and highly leveraged firms might have to shut downpermanently or declare bankruptcy, which could have longer-lasting repercussions on productive capacity.") and 25 ("Taken together, these data suggest considerable risk offailure for a large number of small businesses."). See Adam Harris, "The Other Way the Coronavirus Will Ravage Our Cities," The Atlantic (Apr. 1, 2020). Large Corporations Committee of the Bankruptcy & COVID-19 Working Group, Letter to Congressional Leadership (May 7, 2020). International Monetary Fund, Global Stability Report: Markets in the Time of COVID-19 (Apr. 2020). John C. Williams, "Now is the Time for Banking Culture Reform" (June 18, 2018).1718192021222324252627282930313233
Ravi Menon: Shanghai and Singapore - financial centre partnershipPanel remarks (via video conference from Singapore) by Mr Ravi Menon, Managing Director ofthe Monetary Authority of Singapore, at Lujiazui Forum 2020, 18 June 2020.*   *   *China-Singapore Financial Co-operationLet me first congratulate the Shanghai Municipal Government for successfully convening theLujiazui Forum while the world is still grappling with the Covid-19 pandemic.Singapore is honoured to be the Lujiazui Forum’s Partner City this year.Covid-19 has unleashed not only an economic crisis but also a growing fragmentation of theglobal economy.  This is a threat facing the whole world.But the countries in Asia are well placed to lead the global economic recovery andforge new channels of cooperation and integration.Finance can play a key role in facilitating this economic recovery and integration.  China andSingapore can help to blaze a new trail in financial cooperation and innovation in Asia.2020 marks the 30th anniversary of the China-Singapore bilateral relationship.  Financialcooperation has been a highlight of this relationship.  We have made good progress in threeareas.First, growing the offshore RMB market.Since 2013, with ICBC being appointed as RMB clearing bank in Singapore, this hashelped to promote greater use of RMB in the region.Singapore is the largest offshore centre for RMB deposits and RMB trade finance andsecond largest for RMB foreign exchange trading, outside Greater China.Second, enhancing the links between our capital markets.The Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS) and the People’s Bank of China (PBC) arelooking to enable designated banks in Singapore to offer custody and trading servicesfor global investors in China’s bond market.Third, providing opportunities for our financial institutions to grow in each other’s markets. The Bank of China and ICBC are among the select group of nine Qualifying Full Banksin Singapore; five Chinese banks are licensed as Wholesale Banks.All three Singapore-headquartered local banks are incorporated in China.The Shanghai-Singapore ConnectionWithin this broader canvass of financial co-operation, the ties between Shanghai and Singaporehave been intensifying.Singapore banks are deepening their partnerships in Shanghai –DBS and Shanghai Pudong Development Bank in loan syndication and joint bondunderwriting;OCBC and Bank of Shanghai in digital banking and supply chain financing; 1 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
UOB and Shenergy Group in establishing a consumer finance corporation. Our exchanges are working closer together.The Asia Pacific Exchange (APEX), a commodities derivatives exchange in Singapore,is collaborating with the Shanghai International Energy Exchange (INE) to attract moreinternational institutional investors to China’s commodity derivatives markets.The co-operation between the regulators has been growing stronger.The Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS) and the Shanghai Municipal FinancialRegulatory Bureau have been organising since 2017 a joint training and exchangeprogramme for financial agencies and institutions from both cities.MAS and the Shanghai Municipal Financial Regulatory Bureau have also organisedsince 2015 four editions of the Singapore-Shanghai Financial Forum (SSFF).MAS will set up a new Shanghai Representative Office in August this year.The Shanghai Representative Office will be MAS’ second office in China, in addition toits Beijing Representative Office.This year will also see the launch of the Singapore-Shanghai Comprehensive CooperationCouncil Financial Working Group, which will facilitate financial institutions in our two cities toparticipate in various areas such as cross-border RMB business and product innovation.Let me suggest one important area where Shanghai and Singapore can work together for thegreater good – and that is to harness the power of finance to promote a greener, moresustainable economy.Using Finance to Green the EconomyThe world needs to take urgent actions to reduce the risk of catastrophic climate change. Finance can be a powerful tool to promote a more sustainable economy and society.Both China and Singapore are committed to meeting their sustainability goals under the ParisAgreement.  Both countries have embarked on ambitious green finance agendas.China issued a Green Industry Guiding Catalogue last year to harmonise differing standards forgreen activities, and is in the process of updating its taxonomy on green bonds to align withinternational practices.Chinese companies led the world with US$33.6 billion of green bond issuance lastyear.Singapore launched a Green Finance Action Plan last year, built on three core pillars:building the financial industry’s resilience against environmental risks;developing green financial products and solutions; andleveraging technology to support the development of green finance.As we stimulate our economies to bounce back from the Covid-19 crisis, there is a goodopportunity for Shanghai and Singapore to collaborate on promoting green finance in the region.There is strong demand in Asia for green investment.According to a study by the United Nations Environment Programme(UNEP) and DBS Bank, US$200 billion in green investment is required 2 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
annually until 2030, to support the greening of Asian economies.We already see Chinese and Singapore banks partnering to finance green and sustainableprojects.In April last year, ICBC Singapore worked with DBS and other global banks to jointlyissue its first Belt and Road green bond, sized at US$2.2 billion, and more recentlyissued its first green loan in Singapore, through a partnership with DBS and OCBC.In September last year, the Singapore branch of the Agricultural Bank of Chinacollaborated with UOB and BNP Paribas to originate a US$200 million green loan inSingapore.There is scope for our financial centres to deepen our partnership in green finance.One, we could create together frameworks for green and sustainability-linked loans customisedfor Chinese and Singaporean small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs).Such frameworks can help promote cross-border syndications in green loans.They can also help to reduce the borrowing costs of SMEs, which will not need toincur expenses for external reviews certifying their activities are green.As Vice Premier Liu He said earlier, we must focus on increasing the proportion ofSME loans, to promote economic transformation and upgrading.Two, we could work together to apply innovative FinTech solutions to promote green finance.The Sustainable Digital Finance Alliance (SDFA) founded by China’s Alibaba Ant Financial andUNEP is a good example.  The SDFA has engaged the FinTech community on applying digitaltechnology to promote green finance – such as the digitisation of green bonds. MAS’ annual Global FinTech Hackcelerator is another platform through which financial institutionsand FinTech firms in Shanghai and Singapore can collaborate on innovative green financesolutions.The Hackcelerator is a global competition that invites market-ready solutions for realproblems faced by the financial industry.This year, green finance is a key theme for the programme, and because of the Covid-19 situation, we are conducting the entire Hackcelerator – from sourcing proposedsolutions to curating prototypes – on a cloud-based platform called the API Exchange(APIX).Through APIX, financial institutions and FinTech firms in Shanghai can engage otherplayers across Asia in collaborative experiments to create digital solutions to supportgreen finance.I would also like to take this opportunity to invite Shanghai FinTech firms and financial institutionsto participate in the Singapore FinTech Festival this November.ConclusionThere is much that our two financial centres can do together. Strengthening the partnership between Shanghai and Singapore will bring broader benefits to oureconomies, and together with other financial centres such as Hong Kong, Tokyo, and Sydney,create a more vibrant financial ecosystem across Asia. 3 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
Richard H Clarida: US economic outlook and monetary policySpeech (via prerecorded video) by Mr Richard H Clarida, Vice Chair of the Board of Governors ofthe Federal Reserve System, at the Foreign Policy Association, New York City, 16 June 2020.*   *   *It is my pleasure to meet virtually this evening with the members and invited guests of theForeign Policy Association (FPA). I am truly honored to receive the Foreign Policy AssociationMedal. Past honorees have included Sheila Bair, Anne-Marie Slaughter, Paul Volcker, Jean-Claude Trichet, and my Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) colleague John Williams—andso with this award, I am indeed in select company. Although I have been very much lookingforward to receiving this award in person, that, of course, is not possible tonight, but I greatly lookforward to attending a future dinner to convey in person my genuine appreciation to the membersof the FPA for this special honor. Since mid-March, I, along with my FOMC colleagues, havebeen working from home. Indeed, just last week, we held our scheduled June meeting via secureteleconference. And while I certainly miss the opportunities for face-to-face interactions along thecorridors of the Board’s Eccles Building, I am grateful to have the ability to work from home andwant to convey my deep gratitude to all of those on the frontlines of the crisis, who are workingoutside the comfort of their homes in grocery stores, hospitals, and other businesses thatprovide essential services.Current Economic Situation and OutlookWhile the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic has taken a tragic human toll measured in terms oflives lost and suffering inflicted, the pandemic has also inflicted a heavy toll on the levels ofactivity and employment in the U.S. economy, as a direct result of the necessary public healthpolicies put in place to mitigate and control the spread of the virus. Real gross domestic product(GDP) declined at a 5 percent annual rate in the first quarter of the year and will almost surelycontinue to contract at an unprecedented pace in the second quarter. The unemployment rate,which reached a 50-year low of 3.5 percent as recently as February of this year, surged to 14.7percent in April, an 80-year high. In May, there was a notable rebound in employment and declinein unemployment, and these developments are certainly welcome. Moreover, in recent weeks,some other indicators suggest a stabilization or even a modest rebound in some segments ofthe economy. But activity in many parts of the economy has yet to pick up, and GDP is fallingdeeply below its recent peak. And, of course, despite the improvements seen in the May jobsreport, the unemployment rate, at 13.3 percent, remains historically high.After the extreme turbulence witnessed in March, financial markets across many sectors havenormalized and are again serving their essential role of intermediating flows of savings andinvestment among borrowers and lenders. Bank credit lines are providing liquidity to companies,and corporations with debt rated investment grade and high yield are able to issue, and in size, inthe corporate bond market. I believe—and most outside observers agree—that this easing offinancial conditions since March is, at least in part, the direct consequence of economic policyresponses to the crisis, including the actions the Federal Reserve took at our March 15 meetingand the subsequent announcement and sequential launch of 11 new facilities to support the flowof credit to households and companies. While this easing of financial conditions is, of course,welcome to the extent that it supports the flow of credit to households and firms during thischallenging period, it may not prove to be durable, depending on the course that the coronaviruscontagion takes and the duration of the recession that it causes. At minimum, the easing offinancial conditions is buying some time until the economy begins to recover.As I speak to you today, there is extraordinary uncertainty about both the depth and the durationof the economic downturn. Because the course of the economy will depend on the course of thevirus and the public health policies put in place to mitigate and contain it, there is an unusually1 1 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
wide range of scenarios for the evolution of the economy that could plausibly play out over thenext several years. In my baseline view, while I do believe it will likely take some time foreconomic activity and the labor market to fully recover from the pandemic shock, I do projectright now that the economy will resume growth starting in the third quarter. In terms of inflation,my projection is for the COVID-19 contagion shock to be disinflationary, not inflationary, and thedata we are seeing so far are consistent with this projection. For example, core CPI (consumerprice inflation) prices fell 0.4 percent in April, the largest monthly decrease since the beginning ofthe series in 1957. Although the decline in core CPI was smaller in May, on a year-over-yearbasis, core CPI is running at 1.2 percent, the slowest pace in nine years. While the COVID-19shock is disrupting both aggregate demand and supply, the net effect, I believe, will be foraggregate demand to decline relative to aggregate supply, both in the near term and over themedium term. If so, downward pressure on PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation,which was already running somewhat below our 2 percent objective when the downturn began inMarch, will continue. Moreover, I judge that measures of longer-term inflation expectations were,when the downturn began, at the low end of a range that I consider consistent with our 2 percentinflation objective and, given the likely depth of this downturn, are at risk of falling below thatrange. The Federal Reserve has a dual mandate from the Congress to pursue policies that aimto achieve and sustain maximum employment and price stability. To me, price stability requiresthat inflation expectations remain well anchored at our 2 percent objective, and I will place a highpriority on advocating policies that will be directed at achieving not only maximum employment,but also well-anchored inflation expectations consistent with our 2 percent objective.The Policy ResponseAt the Federal Reserve, we take our dual-mandate obligations of maximum employment andprice stability very seriously, and, since March 3, we have deployed our entire toolkit to providecritical support to the economy during this challenging time. In two unscheduled meetings, wevoted on March 3 and March 15 to cut the target range for the federal funds rate by a total of 150basis points to its current range of 0 to 25 basis points. In our FOMC statements, we haveindicated we expect to maintain the target range at this level until we are confident that theeconomy has weathered recent events and is on track to achieve our maximum-employmentand price-stability goals.On March 16, we launched a program to purchase Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities in whatever amounts needed to support smooth market functioning, therebyfostering effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financial conditions. To date, thesepurchases have totaled more than $2.3 trillion, and, as we indicated at our June meeting, they willcontinue in coming months at least at the current pace, which should sustain smooth marketfunctioning, thereby fostering effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financialconditions.Since March 17, the Board has announced the establishment of no fewer than 11 new facilities tosupport the flow of credit to households and businesses. These programs are authorized underemergency lending powers granted to the Fed under section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Actand are available only in “unusual and exigent” circumstances and with the consent of theSecretary of Treasury. These facilities are supported with money invested by the Department ofthe Treasury, drawing on appropriations of more than $450 billion authorized by the Congress inthe CARES Act (Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act) for the specific purpose ofinvesting in Fed programs to sustain the flow of credit to households, firms, and communitiesduring the coronavirus pandemic. With these facilities, we are providing a bridge by stepping inand supporting lending throughout the economy until the recovery takes hold. These programsare designed to offer backstop sources of funding to the private sector, and just theannouncement that these backstop facilities would soon be launched appears to have bolsteredconfidence in capital markets, allowing many companies to finance themselves privately evenbefore the facilities were up and running. But importantly, these are, after all, emergency23 2 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
facilities, and someday—hopefully soon—the emergency will pass. When that day comes andwe are confident the economy is solidly on the road to recovery, we will wind down these lendingfacilities at such time as we determine the circumstances we confront are no longer unusual orexigent.The Federal Reserve has played a leading role in the global economic policy response to thecoronavirus pandemic. Foreign financial institutions borrow and lend in U.S. dollars, and thesedollar funding markets seized up when COVID-19 emerged. In globally integrated financialmarkets such as ours, these strains in dollar funding markets outside the United States affect theflow of credit to U.S. households and businesses. As such, during the week of March 15, theFederal Reserve coordinated with five foreign central banks to enhance its standing dollarliquidity swap lines. In addition, temporary swap lines were reestablished with the nine centralbanks that had temporary agreements during the Global Financial Crisis. Moreover, to supportdollar liquidity to a broad range of countries, the Federal Reserve announced a new program onMarch 31, the temporary FIMA (Foreign and International Monetary Authorities) Repo Facility.Under this facility, FIMA account holders at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (which includecentral banks and other monetary authorities) can enter into overnight repos (repurchaseagreements) with the Federal Reserve, temporarily exchanging U.S. Treasury securities in theiraccounts for U.S. dollars, which can then be provided to institutions in their respectivejurisdictions. All of these facilities have had a very constructive effect in calming down dollarfunding markets and supporting a return to more normal conditions in global financial marketsmore generally.Of course, as members of the FPA, you are well aware that developments in the U.S. economydo not happen in isolation from the rest of the world. We live in a globally integrated economy.With COVID-19, all countries have been hit by a global common shock, not only directly by thevirus and the measures necessary to combat it, but also by the economic spillovers from thoseactions around the world. As in the United States, many foreign authorities have taken swift andforceful actions in response. My colleagues and I have worked closely with others—bilaterallyand in international forums like the Group of Seven, Group of Twenty, Bank for InternationalSettlements, and Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development—to monitor andaddress the effects of the pandemic. The forcefulness and synchronized timing of actions byfiscal authorities, central banks, and regulators have helped support the incomes of householdsand firms and reduce market stresses that could have amplified the shock.Not only is the Federal Reserve using its full range of tools to support the economy through thischallenging time, but our policies will also help ensure that the rebound in activity when itcommences will be as robust as possible. That said, it is important to note that the Fed’sstatutory authority grants us lending powers, not spending powers. The Fed is not authorized togrant money to particular beneficiaries, to meet the payroll expenses of small businesses, or tounderwrite the unemployment benefits of displaced workers. Programs to support such worthygoals reside squarely in the domain of fiscal policy. The Fed can only make loans to solvententities with the expectation the loans will be paid back. Direct fiscal support for the economy isthus also essential to sustain economic activity and complement what monetary policy cannotaccomplish on its own. Direct fiscal support can make a critical difference, not just in helpingfamilies and businesses stay afloat in a time of need, but also in sustaining the productivecapacity of the economy after we emerge from this downturn.Fortunately, the fiscal policy response in the United States to the coronavirus shock has beenboth robust and timely. In four pieces of legislation passed in just over two months, the Congressvoted $2.9 trillion in coronavirus relief, about 14 percent of GDP. Depending on the course of thevirus and the course of the economy, more support from both fiscal and monetary policy may becalled for.Concluding Remarks45 3 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
The coronavirus pandemic poses the most serious threat to maximum employment and,potentially, to price stability that the United States has faced in our lifetimes. There is much thatpolicymakers—and epidemiologists—simply do not know right now about the potential coursethat the virus, and thus the economy, will take. But there is one thing that I am certain about: TheFederal Reserve will continue to act forcefully, proactively, and aggressively as we deploy ourtoolkit—including our balance sheet, forward guidance, and lending facilities—to provide criticalsupport to the economy during this challenging time and to do all we can to make sure that therecovery from this downturn, once it commences, is as robust as possible.These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal ReserveBoard or the Federal Open Market Committee. I am grateful to Brian Doyle and Chiara Scotti of the FederalReserve Board staff for their assistance in preparing this text. See the FOMC statements issued after the March 3 and March 15 FOMC meetings, which are available (alongwith other postmeeting statements) on the Board’s website atwww.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm. See Federal Reserve Act, 12 U.S.C. § 343 (1932), quoted text in paragraph 3.A. The swap fee was reduced from 50 basis points to 25 basis points over the U.S. dollar overnight index swaprate. To better target stresses in funding markets for longer-term dollar borrowing, swap operations with amaturity of 84 days were added to the usual 7-day operations by the four central banks that traditionally holdregular auctions—the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, the European Central Bank, and the Swiss NationalBank. Finally, these four central banks announced that they would begin daily auctions. See Board of Governorsof the Federal Reserve System (2020), “Coordinated Central Bank Action to Enhance the Provision of U.S. DollarLiquidity,” press release, March 15; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020),“Coordinated Central Bank Action to Further Enhance the Provision of U.S. Dollar Liquidity,” press release,March 20.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020), “Federal Reserve Announces the Establishmentof Temporary U.S. Dollar Liquidity Arrangements with Other Central Banks,” press release, March 19. 12345 4 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
SPEECH  SVERIGES RIKSBANK SE-103 37 Stockholm (Brunkebergstorg 11)  Tel +46 8 787 00 00 Fax +46 8 21 05 31 registratorn@riksbank.se www.riksbank.se  DATE:   17 June 2020  SPEAKER: Deputy Governor Henry Ohlsson  VENUE:   riksbank.se        1 [6]  Monetary policy during the economic crisis* The economic crisis the world economy is now experiencing is the deepest for many decades. Both demand and supply have declined substantially around the world. Economic policy faces major challenges. Sweden, which is a small open economy, has been severely affected by the reduced economic activity in the world around us. Naturally, we have also been affected by how international eco-nomic policy to deal with the crisis has been formulated.   I will in this speech highlight three challenges that monetary policy has faced dur-ing the spring. These challenges have by no means disappeared, we will continue to deal with them.   The first challenge has been that the financial markets function less smoothly dur-ing severe economic crises. This has been an important base for the Riksbank's monetary policy during the spring.  Monetary policy aims to attain the inflation target. A second challenge at present is that the inflation statistics are difficult to interpret. For instance, there are no prices for many goods and services because there is quite simply no economic ac-tivity on these markets.  Monetary policy must also be forward looking. Under normal circumstances this means that monetary policy is formulated according to forecasts of future eco-nomic developments. The third challenge is that we are currently living with genu-ine uncertainty. Who could have imagined in autumn 2019 that spring 2020 would turn out the way it did?   * I would like to thank Mårten Löf, who has helped me with this speech. Moreover, I have received valuable com-ments from Charlotta Edler, Mattias Erlandsson, Rebecka Hallerby, Peter Kaplan and Marianne Sterner. 
       2 [6]  Monetary policy has pushed down market rates During the spring, the Riksbank has decided on a number of monetary policy measures. When financial markets do not function as normal, the credit supply in the economy is threatened. Here, I wish to highlight four measures that the Riks-bank has implemented.1 The first has concerned buying government bonds, mort-gage bonds and municipal bonds, as well as commercial paper for a total of SEK 300 billion.   The Riksbank has, secondly, decide to give the banks the opportunity to borrow from the Riksbank so they can in turn offer loans to companies, SEK 500 billion has been allocated for this purpose. The third measure gives the banks the oppor-tunity to borrow an unlimited amount from the Riksbank. And the fourth measure is the Riksbank's decision to lend up to 60 billion US dollars to banks that need for-eign currency.  These measures have two effects. They facilitate credit supply as the Riksbank in this way supplies more money to the financial system. When the volume of money increases, there is also downward pressure on market rates. In other words, the result is a secure credit supply and expansionary monetary policy.  Figure 1. Yields on 5-year bonds Per cent  Sources: Macrobond and the Riksbank                                                             1 Read about all the measures the Riksbank has taken on our website. Information on the measures is updated weekly. See https://www.riksbank.se/en-gb/press-and-published/updates-on-the-riksbank-and-the-coronavirus-pandemic/the-riksbanks-measures-in-connection-with-the-corona-pandemic/.   
       3 [6]  Figure 1 shows the development in yields on different types of bond on the Swe-dish market. The economic crisis initially meant that bond yields rose. This was not a desirable development. But they have recently begun to fall back. To me, it is obvious that the Riksbank’s expansionary monetary policy measures have pushed down market rates. And if necessary, the Riksbank will do more.  Inflation statistics difficult to interpret  Under normal circumstances, monetary policy can be based on the analysis of a long line of economic quantities. As monetary policy is conducted with an infla-tion target, the statistics on inflation outcomes become particularly important.   During the economic crisis an obvious problem with inflation statistics has been that there are no prices for the goods and services that cannot be consumed at present. This of course creates problems when calculating the consumer price in-dex (CPI).  Statistic Sweden (SCB) have clearly described their methods.2 For products that have no prices, they use the price development on similar products that do have prices. For products that do not have “similar” products, such as various types of foreign air travel, the annual percentage change in total CPI is used. Replacing missing prices in this way is usually referred to as imputation. The total weight in the CPI for the products where prices are imputed in this way is not particularly large; it amounts to just under 3 per cent of the total weight of the CPI, see Figure 2.   The percentage of imputed prices is at present much higher in other parts of Eu-rope. Figure 2 shows the aggregate weight for the product groups where imputa-tion has been necessary in total for the euro area and the larger euro-area coun-tries. The statistics refer to the harmonised index for consumer prices, the HICP.3                                                                2 See the press release and the material presented at an extraordinary meeting in the Consumer Price Index Board on 1 April. 3 The HICP was developed by Eurostat, which is the EU’s statistical body. The measure was designed to facilitate international comparisons of inflation. 
       4 [6]  Figure 2. Percentage of imputations in the HICP 4 Per cent  Source: Eurostat  What do the many imputations abroad entail for the quality of the statistics? The conclusion in a current working report written by two world-leading researchers in this field is that the principles recommended by international organisations lead to underestimation of the rate of inflation and overestimation of the real increase in consumption.5 However, this is probably no major problem for Sweden, as the percentage of prices imputed is relatively low. The problems could be much greater for other countries, and therefore for international comparisons.  Another problem with the inflation statistics at present is that the actual con-sumption pattern that has arisen during the crisis does not tally with the weights for different goods and services in the consumer price index. Or, put differently, Swedes have bought more toilet paper and fewer trips abroad than the weights in the consumer price index imply.  At present, we do not know whether the changes in consumption patterns are temporary or permanent. If they are temporary, the actual consumption pattern will gradually move towards the consumption pattern represented by the weights in the consumer price index.   If the changes in consumption patterns are permanent, it will be the weights in the consumer price index that move towards the actual consumption pattern. In Sweden, the weights are revised once a year on the basis of the consumption pat-tern a year or so earlier.                                                              4 For further information see https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/hicp/methodology. 5 See Diewert & Fox (2020). 
       5 [6]  But regardless of whether the changes in the consumption pattern are temporary or not, the actual consumption pattern will deviate for a period of time from the consumption pattern represented by the weights in the consumer price index. This means that the development in the consumer price index will not agree for a period of time with the actual development in the cost of living.  It is difficult to make predictions What do we actually know about the future? What can we use to say something about what will happen? One thing we can use, is to look at how things have been before. The empirical national economist’s traditional method is to gather data, to structure data and to seek correlations between different economic variables. Data is gathered from history, the correlations found are historical ones.  For me, traditional forecasting is all about using history in various ways to tell us something about the future. But of course it is not always the case that things be-have in the same way as before. Sometimes developments take a new path, a path that we had not imagined. Spring 2020 was a good example of this. When the crisis came, history was not much help to us. Apart from being unexpected, each crisis is unique.   The April Monetary Policy Report therefore did not present any forecast. Instead, it presented two scenarios showing two possible developments over the coming period. I consider that this was as far as we could go when we could not use his-tory to help us.  To me, it has been natural that monetary policy in recent months has been very much in the here and now. The problems arising required immediate measures. The measures taken have made monetary policy more expansionary. And we can-not rule out the possibility of setbacks. When we can once again interpret infla-tion statistics and when we can once again use history to say something about the future, monetary policy can also become more forward-looking than it has been in recent months.    
       6 [6]  References   Diewert, W.E and Fox, K.J. (2020), “Measuring real consumption and CPI bias un-der lockdown conditions”, NBER working paper series, No. 27144.   Statistics Sweden (2020), press release (2020), ”Svårare beräkna inflation under coronapandemin”, (More difficult to calculate inflation during the corona pan-demic) www,scb,se  Statistics Sweden (2020), report to Consumer Price Index Board, ”Hantering av effekter av Corona-pandemin i KPI och HIKP”, (Managing the effects of the corona pandemic on the CPI and HICP) www,scb,se  Appendix Table 1. Products affected by lack of consumption   Weight in CPI (per cent) Air package tours 1.2. Foreign air travel 0.6. Tickets to sporting events 0.4. Cinema tickets 0.2 Theatre tickets and entertainment 0.2 Entry tickets to entertainment 0.3 Total weight in CPI 2.9 Source: Statistics Sweden  
            I would like to thank Natalia Dobrovolschi, Rachel James, Cordelia Kafetz, Hardeep Rai, Josh Sadler, Jonathan Wakefield, and Ellen Caswell for their assistance with preparing this speech and  Laura Wallis and Stephanie Haffner for their comments and input.     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 1      Payments after the COVID crisis – emerging issues and challenges   Speech given by Christina Segal-Knowles Executive Director  Financial Market Infrastructure Directorate   Webinar: London School of Economics and Centre for Economic Policy Research  11 June 2020   
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 2  2   Thanks Erik and thanks very much for inviting me to this webinar.    I’ll talk through very briefly how payments were changing well before COVID-19 and the impact we’ve seen during the global health crisis.  And then I’ll begin to cover what central banks can and are doing in response.     Even before the current crisis, people were changing the way they pay.    For many if not all of you– the fact that the way we pay has been changing significantly won’t be a surprise. You’ve experienced this.  In London, where I live and work, contactless payments have become ubiquitous – from small coffee shops, to farmer’s markets, to stalls at sporting and music events, the need to rush to the cash machine is gone - you can tap your card, phone or watch. We’ve become accustomed to online baskets and clicks; to summoning and paying for services on our phone.  People’s behaviour has changed.  About a year and a half ago I stopped carrying a wallet with room for cash– all I needed on a daily basis was a debit card and my phone.  I am not alone.  And is this shift is not exclusive to London – from 2017 to 2019 the number of people using cash just once a month or less in the UK more than doubled to 7.4 million.1 The result has been a marked increase in digital payments, particularly card payments, and a steady decline in the use of cash for retail transactions.  In mid-2016 cards overtook cash for the first time as the most frequently-used payment in the UK.  And the trend hasn’t looked back.   This doesn’t mean that cash is not still important for some. There are important inclusion implications that I won’t do justice to here but that deserve a mention – while UK Finance estimates that 98 percent of people in the UK had a debit card in 2019, there are still groups that continue to rely on cash, with this reliance relating                                                       1 See UK Finance Press Release: Cards used for half of payments for first time last year. https://www.ukfinance.org.uk/press/press-releases/cards-used-half-payments-first-time-last-year 
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 3  3   to factors spanning age, income, disability and geography.  The UK government has said that the UK is committed to ensuring that those who rely on cash will continue to be able to access it, and the Bank of England supports this important agenda. While this story I’m telling about the move to digital payments has been UK-focused – the trend is global.  Many emerging market and developing countries have also seen a sharp rise in digital and in particular mobile payments.  Some types of international payments – importantly including remittances – remain expensive and cumbersome.    As domestic payments are evolving, the importance of international payments is rising.  Cross-border  e-commerce has risen. And remittances inflows have increased by 64% in the last decade to overtake foreign direct investment as the largest source of external financing for low and middle income countries.2  But cross-border payments are often more expensive, slower, less transparent and harder to access than domestic ones. The average cost of remittances, for example, stood at around 7% in 2019, well above the UN sustainable development goal of 3% by 2030.3  And the same frictions exist in other types of wholesale and retail cross-border payments. Work is underway at the international level to tackle these frictions. Enhancing cross-border payments is a G20 priority for 2020. The international Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructure has a task force looking at possible solutions. But there is no magic bullet. This will require international coordination on several fronts: with solution elements ranging from harmonised processes (AML checks), agreed targets, improvements to existing infrastructures (aligning opening hours) and even new infrastructures (for example to interlink domestic systems).                                                        2 World Bank Press Release: Predicts Sharpest Decline of Remittances in Recent History https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2020/04/22/world-bank-predicts-sharpest-decline-of-remittances-in-recent-history 3 FSB Report on Enhancing Cross-border Payments: https://www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/P090420-2.pdf 
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 4  4   The COVID-19 crisis has accentuated these trends and brought new challenges.   The COVID-19 crisis has accelerated these trends.  Temporary closure of shops and restaurants, or the desire to socially isolate led people to increasingly turn to online shopping. And many shops are encouraging contactless forms of payment over the use of cash. In the UK, data from LINK, the UK’s largest cash machine network, suggests that cash transactions have plummeted.  Since the UK lockdown began (24th of March), ATM cash withdrawals in the UK have dropped by around 60%.4   A recent LINK survey found that 75% of survey respondents are using less cash than before the crisis.5 And online sales have taken off, jumping to 30% of total retail transactions in the UK in April 2020 from just over 18% a year earlier.6  To make these stats more real, my parents have for the first time in their lives begun shopping for groceries online. Now, I don’t know whether my dad’s extreme grumpiness about having someone else pick his produce means he’ll return to shopping in-person once it’s safe for him to do so or whether the convenience of having someone arrive at his door with his groceries will win him over.   In time, we’ll see how enduring the broader shifts are. Indeed, in that same LINK survey, 76% of respondents said that the Coronavirus crisis will affect their future cash use. Internationally, COVID-19 has also exacerbated challenges in sending remittances.7   And many countries, advanced and developing, has necessitated sharp increases in government to person payments – raising new challenges.8                                                           4 LINK: Coronavirus Crisis means cash use down but UK still withdrawing £1billion from ATMs each week: https://www.link.co.uk/about/news/coronavirus-cash-usage-data/ 5 See LINK article above. 6 ONS: Internet Sales as a percentage of total retail sales: https://www.ons.gov.uk/businessindustryandtrade/retailindustry/timeseries/j4mc/drsi 7 BBC News: Coronavirus: Migrants struggle to send money home: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-52506797 8 World Bank blogs: Responding to crisis with digital payments for social protection: Short-term measures with long-term benefits: https://blogs.worldbank.org/voices/responding-crisis-digital-payments-social-protection-short-term-measures-long-term-benefits 
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 5  5   The private sector is responding.  Central banks and other regulators will need to respond too.  All this – combined with regulatory changes9 has led to an explosion of innovation in payments. Given these challenges, safe forms of payments innovation are welcome.  They could meet unfulfilled customer needs, widen access to financial services, lower costs, and facilitate better payments integration. Innovation could also support financial stability by increasing diversity in payment methods.  And innovation could potentially address the longstanding challenges in international payments by making them less costly and cumbersome. But even though some new technology seems cutting edge, recent innovation has largely been focused on the ‘front’ or consumer-facing end,  sitting on top of existing card or bank-to-bank payment systems.   Since the invention of the credit card in the 1950s, almost all payments by households and businesses in advanced economies have been made through one of four routes: cash, cheque, card or bank-to-bank.  Most new innovation to date hasn’t changed that. Even when we tap our phone or watch on an ipad to pay –we’re still generally paying by either card or bank-to-bank transfer. But fintechs, and in some cases big technology firms, are now proposing to change this by using cryptoassets known as ‘stablecoins’ for transactions currently processed by retail or wholesale payments systems.  The basic idea of a stablecoin is not dissimilar from a pegged currency.  Early forms of cryptoassets such as Bitcoin have so far proved too volatile for widespread use in payments. ‘Stablecoins’ aim to address this by pegging themselves to a fiat currency or basket of fiat currencies.  Most propose to maintain reserves or backing assets to defend this peg. While some stablecoins proposals are designed as investment products, most seek stability in pursuit of becoming a new way to pay for goods and services or make peer-to-peer transactions. Many propose to integrate into popular social media or online technology platforms.  With this backdrop and an estimated 3 billion social media users worldwide, it’s not hard to imagine that some of these proposals could quickly reach significant scale.                                                         9 including open banking reforms in the EU and the introduction of a payments competition regulator in the UK. 
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 6  6   But of course innovation won’t be sustained if it’s unsafe or detrimental for financial stability. Clear, transparent regulatory expectations are critical to ensure that uncertain rules of the game don’t hold innovation back.   This poses several challenges for regulators – I’m going to focus on the two that are most important for financial stability. We need payments to be secure and reliable.   Problem 1 for central banks is that robust and reliable ways to pay are essential to financial stability.  Well-functioning and resilient payment chains allow payments to be made on time, with confidence, even in periods of economic uncertainty. Think – receipt of your salary, benefits and pensions, direct debit bill payments ability to tap and ride the tube home or leave the restaurant after a meal. The reliability and resilience of payments is so important to our economy that the UK Financial Policy Committee, tasked with identifying, monitoring and reducing systemic risks, lists avoiding serious interruptions in the provision of payment and settlement services as one of the very purposes of preserving financial stability.   If a stablecoin were to significantly replace current systemic payments chains as a way to pay – logic follows that they would pose the same risks to the economy as current payments chains and should be regulated to the same standards.  This is relatively straightforward:  regulation should be technology neutral: based on the activity conducted and the risks posed, not the technology used or the entity’s legal form.  In other words, same risks same regulation. In the UK, recognising the importance of payments for financial stability, the Bank of England supervises systemic payments systems such as Bacs, the Faster Payments Service, CHAPS, and Visa. And internationally, there are principles – the Principles for Financial Market Infrastructure – which Benoit helped to create when he was at the helm of the Committee for Payments and Market Infrastructure - that govern how payments systems should be regulated and the standards they should meet.  These standards form the basis of the BoE’s regulation.  
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 7  7   While same risk, same regulation may seem obvious, in many countries it will require changes to the regulatory framework.  Where stablecoins are used in place of money, they need to offer the same protections as money.   Problem 2 is how do you ensure the stability of the “thing” being transferred in the payments chain. Existing systemic payment arrangements transfer money that is stable and reliable – in bad times and in good.  This generally takes two forms: public central bank money - either reserves held at the central bank or cash; or private commercial bank money – bank deposits. Prudential regulation, access to central bank liquidity, and deposit insurance give holders confidence that underpins their willingness to receive commercial bank money as payment. This gives payment recipients – shops and businesses - confidence that when someone taps their card or phone to pay, the amount promised will arrive in their account. International standards explicitly call on payment systems to settle in central bank money when possible and where that’s not possible, to settle in commercial bank money and to strictly limit any credit and liquidity risk of the instrument being transferred and settled.  However stablecoin arrangements propose to transfer new instruments that they will create themselves – and to settle most of their transactions across their own books.   With the right regulation, stablecoins may be safe for use in systemic payments chains. But the protections these stablecoins would offer are currently big question marks. Some major stablecoin proposals offer no legal claim for holders. None.  This is significantly different from how we currently pay: When my parents pay for their groceries using their debit card, the shop ultimately receives an electronic deposit in the shop’s bank account - a promise from the shop’s bank to redeem the amount deposited in local currency on demand.   When – pre-COVID – my parents paid in cash, the shop got banknotes with a central bank promise to “pay the bearer.”  Were they to pay in the future with some proposed stablecoins, the shop would just get a bunch of stablecoins.  If the shop can’t sell the stablecoin to get local currency or other goods in an amount equivalent to the price of the grocery order, tough luck.  Additionally many stablecoins propose backing in instruments that may have market and liquidity risk. While these risks might be acceptable for speculative investment purposes, payments are different. This is why the 
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 8  8   UK Financial Policy Committee has said that where stablecoins are used in systemic payment chains as money-like instruments, they must meet standards equivalent to commercial bank money in terms of stability of value, robustness of legal claim and the ability to redeem at par in fiat.   Stablecoins’ borderless nature of course also means that international regulators’ coordination is necessary and work is indeed underway.  A Financial Stability Board consultation is ongoing with supervisory recommendations for global stablecoins, aligned with the Bank’s view on same risk – same regulation.  Is there a role for central banks (public money strikes back)?  The changes in how we pay I described at the beginning of this presentation have not just involved a switch from physical cash to electronic payment.  It has also necessarily involved a switch from public, central-bank-issued money to private money.   This is because central bank money is currently only available in physical banknotes or in reserves, which certain regulated financial institutions hold in accounts at the central bank.  For the public and most businesses, the only current option to hold money backed by the central bank is in the form of physical banknotes.   I’ve assumed in the story so far that the cash decline and the rise of online continues the march towards the dominance of private money in our transactions.  But is this right?  An alternative would be for central banks to issue a new electronic form of central bank money that can be used by households and businesses for payments, also known as a central bank digital currency or CBDC.  CBDC presents a number of potential opportunities.   It could help respond to some of the changes and challenges I described in the beginning of this presentation – including helping to meet the future payments needs of the digital economy, addressing the consequences of a decline in access to cash, and providing a building block for better cross-border payments.  It also may be a safer alternative to new proposed forms of private electronic money like stablecoins.   But a CBDC may also have significant implications for how our financial system works – in particular if households and businesses were to move their deposit balances from commercial banks to CBDC.  This could in turn affect how we implement monetary policy and support financial stability. The Bank has launched a dialogue on the appropriate design of CBDC and an evaluation of whether the benefits of CBDC outweigh the risks.  Our deadline for comments is tomorrow – so if you would like to contribute it is not too late.     To conclude – changes in the way we pay and the challenges we’ve seen over the past several months pose two important and interrelated questions for central banks and regulators.  First, how do we ensure that we have legislative and supervisory frameworks in place to support development of safe private sector innovation that could respond to these challenges? Here, it is clear that we need to ensure that new ways to pay and new forms of electronic money are offer equivalent protections to existing ones.  And second, what is the right role for central banks in provision of the money we use to transact?  I’m looking forward to the discussion.  
Gabriel Makhlouf: The economic outlookRemarks by Mr Gabriel Makhlouf, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at Market NewsInternational, 11 June 2020.*   *   *Accompanying slides of the speech.IntroductionGood afternoon.  It is a pleasure to speak to you today.In my opening presentation I would like to first discuss the developments in the euro areaeconomy, the economic outlook for the euro area, and give some views on the recent decisionstaken by Governing Council of the ECB. I will then give an overview of how the pandemic hasimpacted the Irish economy and financial sector in Ireland and discuss some pre-existing risks,like the UK’s departure from the EU.***Developments and economic outlook for the euro area economyIt is now clear that the COVID-19 pandemic has caused a very substantial shock to the globaleconomy. For the euro area, GDP had an unprecedented decline of 3.6% in the first quarter ofthis year, which is a sharper contraction than was seen during the global financial crisis. (Figure1: Euro area GDP growth (quarter-on-quarter, %))Higher frequency PMI data shows the sharp contraction has continued through the secondquarter. There has also been a sharp deterioration in labour markets across the euro area,feeding through to incomes and to consumption patterns. These developments, among others,have caused sharp downward revisions in the recent macroeconomic projections for the euroarea, released by Eurosystem staff. (Figure 2: Euro area Purchasing Managers’ Indices)The latest projections for 2020 to 2022, have changed greatly compared to those released justthree months ago.It is not only the numbers that look different in this round of projections; there has also been achange in how the uncertainty surrounding the key forecasts is presented. Previously, we usedhistorical data but these cannot reflect the unprecedented current economic uncertainty we areexperiencing. Instead, a scenario analysis is provided as a better way to show potential alternatepaths for the economy. (Figure 3: Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections)In the baseline scenario, there is an assumption of some resurgence in infections over the nextcouple of quarters that leads to ongoing containment measures, although not as stringent as theinitial ones. The economy is expected to “re-open” gradually, in phases, through a post-lockdowntransition period, which ends by the middle of 2021.  At this point, it is also assumed that medicalsolutions to contain the virus become available. Two alternative scenarios serve as an illustration of the wide range around the baseline scenario.The mild scenario assumes that the virus is successfully contained in the post-lockdowntransition period and there is no resurgence in infections. Thus, the economy recovers graduallytowards normal levels of activity. In contrast, the virus makes a strong resurgence under thesevere scenario and strict lockdown measures are therefore extended. These are assumed tobe more damaging to economic activity than under the baseline scenario with lower real GDPgrowth and more subdued inflation. It is worth noting that the effect of the pandemic on inflation1 1 / 6BIS central bankers' speeches
dynamics is ambiguous due to competing effects, which could cause inflation to increase ordecrease. The downturn in the economy will result in substantial economic slack, which wouldtend to weaken inflation dynamics. But the pandemic has also caused supply chains to beconstrained and this may continue, which would tend to drive prices up. Overall, it is likely thatthat the substantial economic slack will dominate and result in weak inflation dynamics over themedium-term. (Figure 4: Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections – scenarios)In general, the Eurosystem baseline projections for growth are below those of otherforecasters with the exception of the OECD forecasts that were published on Wednesday. Allforecasters acknowledge the prevailing very high levels of uncertainty. The OECD produces twoscenarios. In their “single-hit” scenario, the current containment measures are assumed to belargely successful in containing the outbreak allowing a gradual recovery in growth andemployment over the remainder of this year and in 2021. In the “double-hit” scenario, there is asecond peak of infections in the autumn. The level of GDP in 2021 in the ECB baseline scenariois roughly the same as the OECD’s “single-hit” scenario.***The June monetary policy decisionThis provided the context to last week’s meeting where I joined my colleagues on the GoverningCouncil of the ECB for one of our regular meetings where we set monetary policy for the euroarea. We took a number of decisions to ensure that the stance is appropriate to achieve ourprice stability objective over the medium-term. These decisions reflect the unprecedenteddownturn in the economy and the deterioration in the outlook for growth and inflation. Themonetary policy stance must maintain favourable financing conditions for all sectors of theeconomy and across countries. Firm demand for credit is particularly strong now given thesignificant liquidity issues many firms face due to the pandemic. An unwarranted tightening offinancial conditions, whereby lending to the real economy becomes constrained, is somethingwe want to avoid.The first decision taken by the Governing Council was to increase the envelope of assetpurchases under the Pandemic Emergency Purchase Programme (PEPP) by €600bn to€1,350bn. The PEPP will contribute to an easing of the monetary policy stance and will help tomain supportive financing conditions for the real economy. These purchases will be conducted ina flexible manner over time, across asset classes and among jurisdictions, to avoid risks to thesmooth transmission of monetary policy.The horizon for the asset purchases under PEPP has been extended at least until the end ofJune 2021. The Governing Council will continue with these purchases until it judges that theCOVID-19 crisis phase is over. When securities purchased under PEPP mature, the principalpayments will be reinvested at least until the end of 2022. The Governing Council will adjust themonetary policy stance further, if necessary.***The Irish economyTurning to the domestic economy, it is remarkable to see how quickly the prospects for the Irisheconomy have changed.For example, in February this year, we published our first Quarterly Bulletin (QB) of the year. TheIrish economy grew strongly in 2019. Given the measurement issues with GDP in Ireland, wetend to focus on underlying domestic demand and we were forecasting a growth rate in thismeasure of 3.7 per cent for 2020. The data also suggested that the public finances wereimproving, with the general government balance in surplus for 2019. We were also forecasting2 2 / 6BIS central bankers' speeches
that the unemployment rate to average 4.8 per cent in 2020. How times have changed. (Figure 5:Central Bank of Ireland QB1 2020 Forecasts)In our second QB of the year, published in April, it was not possible to produce conventionalforecasts due to the extent of the unknowns. Instead we produced a scenario analysis whichrelied heavily on assumptions and analysis of very high-frequency data, where available, tounderstand the magnitude of the decline in economic activity. That projection noted that COVID-19 had triggered an extremely severe economic shock that was fundamentally different in natureand scope from types of shocks previously witnessed. At present, the Bank is preparing topublish its latest projections in early July in line with the ECB scenarios. (Figure 6: Central Bankof Ireland QB2 2020 Scenario Analysis)Since the publication of April’s Quarterly Bulletin, the downturn in economic activity has beensevere. National Accounts data show that consumption declined by 4.7 per cent in the firstquarter of the year. While the phased reopening of the economy has started, a further significantdecline is expected for the second quarter.The decline in employment in March and April is unprecedented, with all sectors of the economyaffected. Job losses came in waves, with 515,000 people now in receipt of the PandemicUnemployment Payment, with a further 380,000 supported by the temporary wage subsidyscheme in their last pay packet. (Figure 7: Numbers in receipt of state payments by scheme)A standout aspect of the economic impact of the pandemic has been the pace at whicheconomic conditions nosedived from the onset of the virus. The measures put in place to impedethe transmission of the virus, such as curtailment or full closure of activity in some sectors andlimits on travel and social gatherings, had an immediate effect on economic activity. For analystsand policymakers, this presents a challenge since many key indicators used to monitoreconomic activity are only released with a lag. For example, official Irish National Accounts dataon consumer spending and investment for the period April-June 2020 is not due to be publisheduntil September 2020.To provide an up-to-date assessment of economic conditions in real time, the Central Bank hasdeveloped a Business Cycle Indicator (BCI). The BCI is a monthly summary indicator of overalleconomic conditions estimated from a larger dataset of high-frequency releases. This weekCentral Bank economists published research containing the latest update of the BCI. Theanalysis shows that the BCI dropped to an unprecedented low at the peak of the containmentmeasures in April, as shown in Figure 4. The decline in the indicator in April suggests that theinitial economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic was both sharper and deeper than thefinancial crisis of 2008/09.The latest preliminary estimate of the BCI for May 2020 points to some stabilisation in economicconditions, but the overall level of activity remains substantially below that observed prior to theCOVID-19 outbreak.***Of course, while the shock from COVID-19 has been extremely severe and has rightly been thefocus for policy makers around the world, the risks that existed before the pandemic have notdisappeared.  I want to mention two: the UK’s departure from the EU and market-based finance.The UK’s departure from the EUFollowing the UK’s exit from the EU on 31 January 2020, negotiations are currently underway totry and conclude a Free Trade Agreement (FTA) between the parties before the end of 2020. Ifthere is no agreement on a new FTA and no extension of the current transition period then theEU and UK could move to trading on WTO terms from January 2021. In previous analysis, the 3 / 6BIS central bankers' speeches
Central Bank has discussed the risks to the economy from future potential post-Brexit tradearrangements. Given the extensive linkages between Ireland and the UK, the UK’s withdrawalfrom the EU will affect the Irish economy through a range of channels.With the UK exiting the EU Customs Union and Single Market, trade between Ireland and the UKwill not be as frictionless as today.  And while the successful conclusion of an FTA couldeliminate tariffs on most EU-UK trade, other frictions would arise that would make trade in bothgoods and services more cumbersome. These non-tariff barriers include the possible need tomanage new import and export formalities, including customs and security declarations. Trade inagri-food products – particularly important in an Irish context – could also be subject to newadditional checks and inspections. In the case of a WTO arrangement these effects on tradewould be compounded by the imposition of tariffs. It is important to note that new tariff and non-tariff barriers would negatively affect both importing and exporting. Over 20 per cent of imports ofIrish-owned firms are either completely or very highly reliant on imports coming from the UK, themajority of these imports are intermediate inputs used for further production in Ireland. (Figure 8:Effects of different UK withdrawal scenarios on Irish output)In addition to disruption to trade flows, the UK’s departure from the EU could affect the economythrough other channels. In the short-run, the ongoing uncertainty over nature of the UK’s futurerelationship with the EU after the transition period could cause firms to delay investmentspending. Heightened uncertainty could weigh on sentiment more generally, dampeningspending by households. Exchange rates and financial markets could also be affected. In thelong-run, the UK’s departure is expected to have negative effects on the UK economy throughlower productivity and weaker investment. Slower UK growth arising from these effects willreduce overall demand for Irish exports, although this could be mitigated by Irish exporters findingnew markets or by an increase in foreign investment and inward migration.***Market-based financeI have spoken previously of the rise in non-bank finance and the risks therein. Ireland hosts alarge and internationally orientated market-based finance sector that has grown rapidly in recentyears. Irish-resident funds are the largest component of this sector in Ireland.  (Figure 9:Financial assets by institution type as a multiple of the country's GDP (GNI*) in 2017, selectedcountries)There are real benefits of market-based finance.  It reduces reliance on the banking system,which in Europe is relatively high.  But, to realise those benefits, it is also important that market-based finance is resilient so that it can absorb, rather than amplify, shocks.At the Central Bank of Ireland – like a number of other authorities internationally – we haveincreased our monitoring of the risks of the sector, with a particular focus on vulnerabilities infunds. Given these entities are international and cross-border in nature, we have also been anactive participant in international work on this issue. Key risks include liquidity mismatch andexcessive leverage in funds.The onset of the COVID-19 saw a significant disruption in markets which raised questionsaround the resilience of markets in the face of shocks. For example, the onset of the pandemicsaw large outflows from funds globally. Irish domiciled funds also experienced large outflows,particularly those with exposures to less liquid assets or assets that became temporarily illiquid.One of the fund segments that proved particularly susceptible to outflows in March wascorporate bond funds. The corporate bond market also saw a sharp deterioration in marketliquidity at the onset of the COVID-19 shock. Flows into corporate bond funds have stabilisedrecently, as global central bank interventions have supported financial market functioning. But345 4 / 6BIS central bankers' speeches
looking ahead, a key risk for the corporate bond market stems from potential credit ratingdowngrades. We will continue to monitor the markets for such developments.A second key area of vulnerability since the onset of COVID-19 was in money market funds.  InMarch, as the crisis began to unfold, some Irish resident money market funds – similar to moneymarket funds globally – experienced a substantial increase in redemptions. Irish resident moneymarket funds responded to this period of stress by increasing their liquidity positions andreducing the maturity of their assets. This means that money market funds are better placed tomeet any future redemption pressures. But it also implies that money market funds haveincreased their investment in short-term funding to the banking system and the real economyand reduced their exposure in long-term funding. As money market funds play an important rolein the supply of credit to the real economy, we also need to continue to monitor thesedevelopments.Although the focus currently is on the near-term monitoring of risks and ensuring a coordinatedinternational response to the COVID-19 shock, the stresses experienced in March furtherhighlight the underlying structural issues relating to some segments of the funds sector. Riskssuch as liquidity mismatch and leverage continue to be part of our focus. We are thinking hardabout how we can mitigate these risks.Over the medium-term, one key area of focus needs to be developing and operationalisingmacroprudential tools for market-based finance.  In the case of the banking sector, we have seenthe benefits of building resilience in good times and allowing that resilience to be used whenshocks hit.  We do not have an equivalent framework for market-based finance.  Potential areasof focus include the development of an internationally-consistent framework for the imposition ofex-ante macroprudential leverage limits, and further work at an international level to ensure theconsistent availability and use of liquidity management tools across the EU (as previouslyhighlighted by ESRB (2017) in their Recommendation on investment funds). More recently, andin response to the COVID-19 shock, the ESRB (2020b) also emphasised the importance of thetimely use of these liquidity management tools in responding to redemption pressures.***ConclusionThank you for listening.  I’ll stop there and take questions.I would like to thank Thomas Conefrey, David Byrne, Stephen Byrne, Neill Killeen, Terry Quinn and Zivile Zekaitefor their contributions to my remarks.European Commission, spring 2020 EC forecast; IMF World Economic Outlook, 6 April 2020; ConsensusEconomics, 11 May 2020; ECB’s Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF) conducted between 31 March and 7April.See Conefrey and Walsh (2020) “Dealing with Friction: EU-UK Trade and the Irish Economy afterBrexit.” www.centralbank.ie/docs/default-source/publications/quarterly-bulletins/quarterly-bulletin-signed-articles/dealing-with-friction-eu-uk-trade-and-the-irish-economy-after-brexit-(conefrey-and-walsh).pdf?sfvrsn=5See Lawless (2018) “Intermediate Goods Inputs and the UK Content of Irish GoodsExports.” www.esri.ie/system/files/media/file-uploads/2018–06/BKMNEXT362.pdfCima, S., Killeen, N. and Madouros, V. (2019), “Mapping Market-Based Finance in Ireland”, Central Bank ofIreland Financial Stability Notes No 17, December.See ESRB (2020a), “Issues note on liquidity in the corporate bond and commercial paper markets, theprocyclical impact of downgrades and implications for asset managers and insurers”, ESRB Report, May.See, ESRB (2017), “Recommendation of the European Systemic Risk Board of 7 December 2017 on liquidity6781234567 5 / 6BIS central bankers' speeches
and leverage risks in investment funds (ESRB/2017/6)”.See, ESRB (2020b), “Use of liquidity management tools by investment funds with exposures to less liquidassets”, ESRB public communication, 13 May 2020.8 6 / 6BIS central bankers' speeches
Bank of KoreaSpeech Commemoratingthe Bank’s 70th Anniversary2020. 6. 12. Juyeol LeeGovernorBank of Korea(This is an unofficial translation prepared by the Bank’s staffs based on original speech released on June 12, 2020.)
1/7Today is the 70th anniversary of the Bank of Korea’s establishment. I wish to express my sincere gratitude to our predecessors who devoted themselves to the development of the Bank of Korea and our economy, and to the many people who have supported and encouraged the Bank. I would like to say in addition how much I appreciate the efforts of all members of our staff, who are unwaveringly fulfilling the duties entrusted to them in their positions at a time when our working environment has been dramatically altered by the unprecedented coronavirus pandemic. Looking back, the Bank of Korea has faithfully carried out its role as a central bank since its foundation in 1950, while making all-out efforts to meet the demands of the times. In the initial stage of economic development, our Bank spared no support as Korea achieved high-speed industrialization-led growth that was the wonder of the world. After experiencing high rates of inflation due to two oil shocks, our Bank devoted its attention to establishing a foundation for price stability. Since the global financial crisis, we have actively carried out our financial stability mandate. All of these efforts have not only provided stepping stones for economic development and stability, but have also laid a foundation for our standing as a central bank to be firmly established.Commemorating our anniversary today, I see no lack of achievements to celebrate from the past 70 years. But as our economy experiences severe hardship due to the COVID-19 pandemic, now is not the time to congratulate ourselves. 
2/7The world is now faced with the defining health crisis of our time. We are in an unprecedented situation in which economic activities have contracted rapidly in many countries due to the social distancing and lockdown measures put in place to contain the spread of the virus. Major economies are in recession amid increased volatility in global financial markets and shrinking global trade. The Korean economy is forecast to record negative growth in the first half of this year with the sharp drops in consumption and exports. The Bank of Korea has taken drastic and unprecedented measures to prevent this pandemic from causing permanent damage to the Korean economy. We lowered the Base Rate to a historic low of 0.5%. We significantly expanded our supply of dollar and won liquidity through FX loans using the proceeds of a currency swap arrangement with the Fed and unlimited RP purchases. We also increased loans through the Bank Intermediated Lending Support Facility for SMEs and small businesses, and to stabilize the credit market we decided to make loans to a non-bank financial institution and an SPV that purchases corporate bonds and commercial paper. Fortunately, our financial markets have stabilized thanks to active responses by the government and the Bank of Korea. However, many hurdles are expected on the road to a full recovery from the real economic crisis created by the COVID-19 pandemic. Among other things, the timing and speed of the recovery will greatly depend on developments of the pandemic going forward. Worsening employment conditions and declining debt repayment capacities in the private sector could also constrain a fledgling recovery. 
3/7What is more, the outbreak of the coronavirus disease will cause no small changes to our economic structure. Affected by the current crisis, deglobalization will begin in earnest, and it could then weaken global supply chains and greatly shake the order of free trade. The spread of untact economic activities will expedite the digitalization of society as a whole, accelerating the Fourth Industrial Revolution and intensifying global competition. In this process, the imbalances that have accumulated in each sector of the economy, such as labor market dualism, income polarization and debt buildup, could become even worse.Considering this changing economic environment, we must waste no time in gearing ourselves up for the post-corona era, while doing everything we can to overcome the crisis. Unless we move beyond the past paradigm of growth relying on accumulation of physical capital, we will not be able to escape low growth even after overcoming the crisis. The best way to prepare for the new era is to establish a productivity-oriented growth framework based on knowledge and technology, by making sure that autonomy and creativity in the private sector can be fully realized.Dear fellow members of the Bank of Korea!The economic crisis triggered by the coronavirus pandemic and the ensuing changes to our economic environment I mentioned earlier are presenting more serious challenges than ever before to the central bank as well.
4/7First of all, we must faithfully fulfill our role as the central bank to surmount the crisis. Monetary policy should remain accommodative until the economy is expected to emerge from the coronavirus-triggered crisis and show a trend of recovery. To maintain financial market stability and smooth credit flows, the Bank of Korea should appropriately deploy policy tools apart from interest rates, if necessary. In addition, we need to closely cooperate with the government to ensure that policy effects are maximized.While maintaining an accommodative monetary policy stance to overcome the crisis, we should not let our guard down against the possibility of financial imbalances building up over the medium- and long-term horizon. This is because we have seen recurring cases in which crises were caused by the accumulation of financial imbalances such as excessive credit expansions and asset price bubbles. While overcoming the current crisis with preemptive responses, we also should devise plans in advance to unwind these unprecedented measures once the crisis subsides. The COVID-19 crisis could raise questions about whether inflation targeting is suitable to the current situation. Even before the crisis, inflation had been running below the target level for a considerable period. In the post-corona era, low inflation could continue for a long time as the incentive for precautionary saving increases, demand slows from accumulation of debt, and digital transformation accelerates. We will need to carry out research on how to improve the monetary policy regime, while closely monitoring the discussions among major central banks.
5/7As we can see from the controversy that started last year surrounding Facebook Libra, digital transformation could move beyond the private sector to the central bank’s payment and settlement system. As an institution responsible for ensuring the safety and efficiency of the payment and settlement system, the central bank needs to proactively respond to these changes. The currently ongoing research and development on central bank digital currency must be carried out as planned. It would also be noteworthy to see how a growing number of central banks are setting up fast payment systems that they directly establish and operate under their real-time gross settlement systems in order to reduce settlement risk.Lastly, as central banks respond to the recent crisis, there has been an ongoing debate over the extent to which their role should be expanded. Although the currency issuing authority has been granted to the central bank by the public, it is a fundamental principle that the central bank should execute it prudently, given that the authority ultimately belongs to the public. However, during the recent crisis, there have also been growing voices calling for the central bank to take bold actions as a “crisis fighter.” Going forward, we will need to think deeply about the extent to which we should accept calls to play a quasi-fiscal role and how we can justify that role, as well as how we can establish a principle for intervening in markets as a central bank, thereby bringing about social consensus.
6/7Dear members of the Bank of Korea!Commemorating the 70th anniversary of the founding of the Bank, we need to once again renew our mission and rekindle our passion for taking the lead in stabilizing and developing our national economy.A couple of days ago, we unveiled ｢BOK 2030｣, our medium- and long-term development strategy set up to ensure that we respond actively to the rapidly changing economic paradigm and to define our new role accordingly, with a vision looking into the next decade. It is intended to foster individual members of the Bank to become top experts in their respective fields and enhance the organization’s flexibility and synergy, thereby maximizing the Bank’s policy capacity. Above all, we will need to upgrade our capacity for research, which is one of our key functions, to deal with the increasingly complicated financial and economic issues we face. We must also fundamentally change the way we work, by introducing the latest digital technology, innovating with respect to our administrative and personnel management systems, and redefining our culture, so that every employee will be able to grow together with the organization.
7/7｢BOK 2030｣ is very meaningful in that it reflects views collected from our own employees as well as advice from outside the organization, and in that young members and future leaders of our Bank participated actively in the process. Action plans will begin to be implemented step by step from the latter half of this year. All members of the Bank of Korea, including myself, will need to join in these efforts, so that this strategy is not just an empty slogan but brings about actual change and innovation to our Bank.Our economy is now facing a critical situation, which is why we all need to have a clear sense of duty. We must remain cool-headed in every judgment we make, and do the best we can in our jobs, so that the decisions we make today will later be regarded as successful in helping overcome this crisis and in preparing for the post-corona era. I would like to thank you once again for your hard work, and I wish you and your family good health and happiness. Thank you. June 12, 2020Governor Juyeol Lee
Luis de Guindos: Euro area - economic outlook and financialstability during the pandemic crisisRemarks (via videoconference) by Mr Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the European CentralBank, at the Institute of International and European Affairs, Frankfurt am Main, 10 June 2020.*   *   *The euro area economy has been experiencing an unprecedented contraction since thecoronavirus (COVID-19) began spreading in Europe. Economic activity declined in the firstquarter by 3.6 percent, quarter-on-quarter, driven by the fall in both domestic and foreigndemand. Consumer spending plummeted, largely due to the shutdown of non-essentialbusinesses and heightened uncertainty about job prospects. Although employment declined onlyby 0.2 percent, quarter-on-quarter, in the first quarter of the year, recourse to nationalemployment schemes remained at unprecedented levels. At the same time, businessinvestment is expected to have collapsed on the back of lockdowns, fading demand, increasinguncertainty and vanishing liquidity. Given the global nature of the shock, both nominal exports andimports of goods declined sharply in March and are expected to remain subdued in the comingmonths.Incoming data suggest a much larger contraction of the economy in the second quarter. After theprojected collapse in the first half of the year, euro area growth is expected to rebound in thesecond half, supported by monetary and fiscal policy and some pent-up demand. In May, surveyindicators suggested that there were some signs of the slump bottoming out alongside theeasing of containment measures. Although the euro area economy remains in a deepcontraction, consumer and business confidence indicators improved in May. At the same time,there has been an improvement in forward-looking indicators, despite remaining well below theirpre-crisis levels, suggesting that firms expect a recovery to take hold in the coming months.This assessment is also consistent with the June 2020 Eurosystem staff macroeconomicprojections for the euro area. After the further severe contraction in the second quarter, real GDPgrowth is projected to rebound in the second half of the year, with an average growth rate of –8.7percent in 2020. Over time, economic activity is expected to grow strongly, by 5.2 percent in2021 and 3.3 percent in 2022. Overall, real GDP will recover only gradually towards pre-crisislevels, remaining below the level expected in the March staff macroeconomic projectionsthroughout the projection horizon. Given the elevated level of uncertainty, the June 2020projections also include two alternative scenarios, a mild one and a severe one, based ondifferent assumptions regarding the further progression of the virus and the necessarycontainment measures.Both monetary and fiscal policies play a crucial role in supporting the recovery in the euro area.Fiscal policies at national and EU level have been crucial in mitigating unemployment risks,bolstering household income and supporting investment by firms. In order to achieve a broad-based recovery, national measures must be backed up by forceful action at the European level.We welcome the new €750 billion EU recovery instrument which consists of €500 billion ingrants and €250 billion in loans to Member States.The sharp contraction in economic activity is also reflected in the inflation slowdown. Headlineinflation decreased further to 0.1 percent in May, from 0.3 percent in April, mainly on account ofthe continued fall in energy prices. Over the coming months, inflation is expected to be close tozero percent, averaging 0.3 percent in 2020, before slowly recovering to 0.8 percent next yearand reaching 1.3 percent in 2022. The inflation projection is also subject to unprecedenteduncertainty, with a faster recovery in the mild scenario.Financial markets 1 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
Euro area financial markets were set in turmoil as the virus spread throughout Europe: euro areasovereign bond spreads widened, corporate bond spreads surged and stock prices plummeted.Financial markets eventually stabilised, notably on the back of a forceful monetary policyresponse by the Eurosystem. But the monetary accommodation generated by the decline in risk-free rates has only slightly eased the tightening in financial conditions caused by the decline instock prices and the increase in euro area sovereign and corporate bond yields.The widening of sovereign bond spreads – on account of the macroeconomic outlook and thesizeable fiscal policy responses endorsed by national governments – is particularly troublingfrom a monetary policy perspective. An effective pass-through of risk-free rates to sovereignbond yields in all countries is crucial because sovereign bond yields are widely used asbenchmark rates for pricing financial market instruments and bank credit. Evidently, the costsbanks face to raise funding in the money, capital and equity markets have notably increased.Monetary policy measuresTightening financial conditions, combined with an outlook for price stability that had significantlyworsened due to the economic fallout of the COVID-19 crisis, prompted the ECB’s GoverningCouncil to take further policy action at its June policy meeting.We decided that the most effective way to respond would be to increase the size of thepandemic emergency purchase programme (PEPP). There were two reasons for this. First, thePEPP can provide a significant degree of additional monetary easing as it directly affects thebenchmark rates used to price financial market instruments and bank credit in all euro areacountries. Accordingly, expanding the overall PEPP envelope by €600 billion will bring ussignificantly closer to the pre-COVID-19 inflation path over the medium term. Second, the PEPPsafeguards monetary policy transmission to all asset classes and jurisdictions thanks to theembedded flexibility in conducting asset purchases.We also agreed to extend the PEPP until June 2021. The projections for the euro area show thatinflation will start to pick up around this date. Likewise, the other monetary policy measures takenin response to the pandemic such as the targeted and pandemic emergency longer-termrefinancing operations (TLTRO and PELTRO programmes), will run their course through thesummer of 2021.Finally, we agreed that reinvestments under the PEPP will take place until at least the end of2022 and, in any case, the future roll-off of the PEPP portfolio will be managed to avoidinterference with the prevailing monetary stance.Looking ahead, the Governing Council will keep re-evaluating whether the size, duration andcomposition of the PEPP remain appropriate as the economic consequences of the COVID-19pandemic unfold. We stand ready to adjust all of our instruments, as appropriate, to ensure thatinflation moves towards our aim in a sustained manner.Financial stability during the pandemic crisisTurning to the stability of the financial system, two opposing forces are now at play: the impact ofthe coronavirus shock – which was amplified by a range of existing vulnerabilities – and the fiscaland monetary policy response in the euro area. Over the last few years, signs of assetmispricing as well as lingering private and public sector debt sustainability concerns had beenidentified as vulnerabilities to financial stability. In addition, euro area banks’ profitability had beenlow, due to both structural and cyclical factors, while non-bank financial intermediaries had grownin size since the great financial crisis, taking on more credit and duration risk.As the coronavirus shock hit the euro area, we observed flight-to-safety phenomena, a surge involatility and a sharp tightening of financial conditions, as in previous crises. In February and early 2 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
March 2020, investment funds experienced exceptionally large outflows. Initially, high-yieldcorporate funds were at the epicentre of redemptions. But, after a slight delay, redemptionsspread to safe havens, such as money market and sovereign funds, as investors needed cashto satisfy margin calls. The combination of high redemptions and low liquidity buffers likelyresulted in forced sales of risky and less risky assets alike, in an environment of already impairedmarket liquidity, amplifying swings in asset prices.Despite pre-existing vulnerabilities, the euro area financial system weathered the immediatestress relatively well, thanks to the regulatory reforms of the past decade and bold policyresponses by monetary, fiscal and prudential authorities. Nevertheless, medium-termvulnerabilities have increased.The shape and strength of the recovery are uncertain and this uncertainty will persist for sometime. There are substantial downside risks, in particular if the easing of containment measuresturns out to be premature or their impact on productive capacity is more persistent.The deteriorating economic conditions may give rise to debt sustainability concerns in the publicand private sector. Corporates, many of which were already highly leveraged before thecoronavirus shock, face a three-pronged challenge of cash-flow strains, higher funding costs andsupply chain disruptions. As regards national governments, the immediate response of allowingautomatic stabilisers to kick in and introducing discretionary support measures was correct inthe midst of a deep recession. In countries with already limited fiscal space, however, theadditional debt may give rise to debt sustainability issues in the future.The pandemic crisis also poses considerable challenges to the banking sector. Let me firstrecall that euro area banks entered the crisis with stronger capital and liquidity positions than theyhad at the time of the global financial crisis a decade ago. This enhanced resilience has allowedbanks to weather the initial strain from the crisis and enabled them to keep lending to theeconomy in what has essentially been a cash-flow shock for firms and households. Unlike in2008, this crisis did not originate from the banking sector and banks have an essential role toplay in supporting the economic recovery.Having said that, the economic downturn triggered by the coronavirus shock, now posesimportant challenges to the banking sector. While banks in the euro area are not at the epicentreof the current crisis, their market valuations were hit hard amid concerns over a furtherweakening in their profitability prospects, which were already subdued well before the pandemicshock hit the economy. This mainly reflects expectations that banks’ credit losses are set toincrease, as they will increasingly be confronted with missed payments and a growing number ofcorporate defaults over the coming quarters.As a result, analyst forecasts of bank profitability for 2020 have undergone large downwardrevisions in recent months, mainly driven by expectations that banks need to increase theirprovisions for future credit losses. In fact, banks’ first quarter results already show aconsiderable negative impact from the crisis in the form of a sharp deterioration in profitability,driven by large increases in loan loss provisions in both the euro area and the United States.Looking beyond cyclical challenges, euro area banks’ profitability prospects are further hinderedby ongoing structural problems. Low cost-efficiency and weak income-generation capacity insome parts of the banking sector, both linked to overcapacity, continue to weigh on banks’ long-term profitability prospects. Recognising the challenges at this juncture, consolidation viamergers and acquisitions could be one potential avenue for reducing overcapacity in the sector.Micro- and macroprudential authorities have also acted swiftly and introduced a range of reliefmeasures to help the banking system maintain the flow of credit. ECB Banking Supervision hasallowed banks to temporarily operate below the level of capital defined by Pillar 2 guidance andthe combined buffer requirement. Banks are now also allowed to meet Pillar 2 requirements with 3 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
lower quality capital as a result of the early introduction of an amendment to the CapitalRequirements Regulation. It furthermore enhanced flexibility in accounting rules and therecognition of non-performing loans. Furthermore, ECB Banking Supervision recommended thatbanks limit capital distribution by refraining from paying dividends or buying back shares.On the macroprudential side, national authorities have either announced a full release ofcountercyclical capital buffers or revoked previously announced increases to these buffers.Authorities have also released or reduced buffer requirements for structural risks and delayed theimplementation of new requirements.Looking ahead, financial stability concerns will crucially depend on the shape of the economicrecovery. Taken together, these measures should help the euro area banking system to sustainlending to households and companies while weathering losses. Complementing these prudentialmeasures, government loan guarantee schemes have the potential to offset at least some of thelosses. The effectiveness of these schemes hinges on their take-up and the ability of borrowersto access loans quickly.Let me conclude. The euro area financial system has faced an economic shock of enormousscale, speed and global breadth in the wake of the coronavirus pandemic. Policy measures haveso far helped prevent a health crisis turning into a systemic financial crisis, but medium-termrisks to financial stability have increased markedly. Main concerns relate to the euro area bankingsector and how it will cope with additional pressure on profitability, as well as the increase inpublic debt levels in the medium-term, and how these will be managed amid weaker growthprospects. 4 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
Fout! Onbekende naam voor documenteigenschap.  1        “Entering and exiting the frozen-state economy”     Opening remarks by Klaas Knot at ‘Virtual session with Klaas Knot: the economic impact of COVID-19’ organised by Danske Bank, 21 April 2020     In his introductory remarks, Klaas Knot said that the outbreak of the coronavirus first of all represents  a global health crisis. At the same time, its consequences are manifesting themselves as an  unprecedented shock to the world economy. Large parts of our economies have been frozen. Many  challenges will unfold on the road to a new normal, which itself is still distant and undefined. It is also  clear that central banks within their mandates stand ready to play their part in mitigating the adverse  economic consequences of this global crisis.   Introduction   Thanks to the organisers for asking me to share with you my take on the macroeconomic  consequences of the global outbreak of the coronavirus.    It is clear that the outbreak and spread of the coronavirus first of all represent a global health crisis. At  the same time, its consequences are also manifesting themselves as an unprecedented shock to the  world economy.    Societies that thrive on interconnectedness have been put on lockdown, bringing large parts of the  economy to a standstill.    How our economies will be affected over the longer term is still unclear. At the moment, we do not  even know whether this will mainly turn out to be a demand or a supply shock, let alone that we can  say something about the size of these shocks.    Irrespective of the many unknowns, the immediate economic policy response has been decisive and  comprehensive.    However, many policy challenges remain. Today, I will focus on some of these challenges that will  manifest themselves over different time horizons of the current crisis. And I will conclude with some  reflections that will be relevant for monetary policy specifically.     First phase: Entering the frozen-state…   For the duration of the acute health crisis, the global economy has been put in a state of cryo- preservation. In layman terms: large parts of our economies have been frozen.    In these circumstances, it is difficult to think of the concept of stimulatory economic policies. Such  policies might even be inconsistent with the lockdown, as we need to slow down society to relieve the  pressure from our overburdened medical systems.   Instead, policymakers have engaged in large-scale preservation policies. To maintain as best as we  can the delicate frozen state of the economy and prevent as much as possible permanent damage.  
Fout! Onbekende naam voor documenteigenschap.  2  Such that we can gradually unfreeze our economies once the health crisis is under control.     For this, we first of all need liquidity: targeted, temporary, yet ample in the broadest possible sense.  Any bankruptcy of a solvent, but temporarily illiquid firm, bank or even government is a waste, and  needs to be avoided wherever possible.    Across the world, we have already made major progress on this front. Central banks have stepped in,  providing liquidity to the financial sector and preserving government’s favorable access to finance.   Governments have helped to facilitate the flow of credit to firms, through measures such as credit  guarantees.   Beyond liquidity support, in multiple countries short-time work schemes have been helpful in  preventing mass lay-offs. In some cases, also direct transfers to small firms or independent  contractors are helping them survive the crisis, without the commensurate build-up of debt levels.    Second phase: …and exiting it   All of us are looking forward to the moment when lockdown-measures can be eased. However, we  should not underestimate the challenges associated with this exit. It will likely be gradual, and might  very well be of a two steps forward, one step back nature. Its effects on the economy will likely be  heterogeneous, too.    Some sectors are relatively well-equipped to function in a frozen economy, and will have no trouble  resuming business. Other sectors might be able to (partially) catch-up on lost revenues as soon as the  lockdown eases.    However, numerous sectors will experience longer-term headwinds from a social distance economy, a  “1.5 meter economy” as we call it in the Netherlands. As, over time, liquidity problems translate into  solvency problems, a share of firms may unfortunately not survive, in spite of all the policy measures.   Moreover, many sectors will experience that, as a consequence of the crisis, the total earning capacity  of our economy will have shrunk, while debt levels have increased.    Challenges of diverging resilience in the recovery phase   These challenges also translate to the country level.     Even when restricting myself to the members of the euro area, there are clear differences in starting  positions, which translate into diverging levels of resilience.    Public debt levels vary widely across Member States. Debt levels range from close to non-existent in  Estonia, to 175% of GDP in Greece, though we know that headline number to be somewhat inflated.    Of course, while public debt levels offer a useful indicator of the fiscal space governments have  available to fight the crisis, they are a narrow indicator of countries’ overall resilience. This also  depends on other factors, such as growth potential and household and corporate debt levels. These  also differ widely across the euro area.    Looking at banks, we know that, in terms of capital buffers, banks are in a better position than in  2008. Yet, the banking sector remains heterogeneous. Non-performing loans as a share of total loans  outstanding, for instance, still vary significantly across countries. This is a legacy of the previous crisis,  which we will need to keep a serious eye on to prevent new problems from emerging.    The diverging resilience of households, firms, banks and governments implies that there is no one- size-fits-all policy advice as to how best preserve and restore the economy. In some cases, it might be  possible to tap into the balance sheets of stronger sectors, to help the weaker ones. Such within- country solidarity can be welfare-enhancing but will not always be possible, or sufficient. Moreover, we  
Fout! Onbekende naam voor documenteigenschap.  3  need to carefully guard the stability of our financial system. No-one benefits when the coronavirus  crisis evolves into a financial crisis. This implies that we need to be cautious with, for instance,  proposals for large-scale debt forgiveness. Such proposals are only viable when financed by  governments.   A pan-European policy response is needed to help the hardest-hit countries. Recent policy  announcements offer a step in the right direction, but this crisis is clearly not one that will be solved  overnight.     Global economic challenges in the new normal   Beyond the recovery phase, the coronavirus might also change the behaviour of economic agents,  affecting the structure of the global economy more fundamentally.    One particularly relevant example concerns global supply chains. In today’s world very few companies  produce their products from start to finish. Instead, the production process is highly fragmented and  takes place all over the world. This design of the global economy has enabled companies around the  world to specialise and has created efficiency gains.    The coronavirus, however, also shows how vulnerable the global economy has become due to firms’  reliance on these highly fragmented global supply chains. A shock in one country can disrupt the entire  supply chain, especially as countries nowadays rely more on just-in-time delivery and therefore hold  lower inventory stocks.    Hence, the virus could give further impetus to the recent trend of deglobalisation. Although I am  certainly not supportive of some of the protectionist drivers of this trend, it is not inconceivable that  companies will reconsider their dependence on one specific supplier or country and diversify or even  re-shore their production process. Notably, a trend of reshoring was already triggered before the  coronavirus due to digitalisation, as this enables companies to reduce the costs of producing at home.  For critical products it is likely, and perhaps even desirable, that companies will keep larger stocks or  increase domestic production capacity going forward.    In addition, authorities may engage in policy measures that have an impact on global value chains. For  example, the Japanese government has already reserved the equivalent of 2 billion euros to encourage  companies to bring back production to their own country and reduce their reliance on supply chains. If  sustained such measures could have a long-lasting impact on global trade and, hence, global economic  activity.    Reflections for monetary policy   Clearly, all phases that I have outlined also come with important policy challenges for central banks.  As discussed, in the preservation phase, the brief for monetary policy is fairly straightforward. Our  policy is directed at maintaining favourable financing conditions for households, firms and  governments, to mitigate any amplification of the ‘corona shock’ through financial channels.    However, the challenge does not stop there. Monetary policy will likely need to continue to play an  important role in the recovery phase. Private sector activity is expected to recover only gradually. Not  only because restrictions will be removed slowly. But also because economic uncertainty is likely to   
Fout! Onbekende naam voor documenteigenschap.  4  linger as long as a vaccine is not yet available and the possibility of a renewed lockdown remains. The  negative effects of the virus outbreak on aggregate demand might thus be quite persistent.    Simultaneously however, firms will need to adjust production processes and business models to a 1.5  meter economy, which will have an effect on productivity and perhaps also on wage and price  formation. This, together with the potential slicing up of global value chains, amounts to the negative  supply shock I alluded to. As of yet, it remains unclear whether demand or supply effects of the  corona-outbreak will dominate. The effects of the virus outbreak on medium-term inflation therefore  also remain unclear.    Finally, how the corona crisis will affect longer-run underlying trends in the global economy is even  more uncertain than the challenges in the preservation and recovery phase. Yet, experiences from  recent decades teach us that secular trends - such as globalisation - can have a substantial impact on  both inflation and the wider economy. This is something central banks will need to adapt to in pursuit  of their mandates. It is also something the ECB might take on board in its – postponed – strategy  review.    Let me summarise. We are confronted with an unprecedented degree of uncertainty with respect to  the economic impact of the coronavirus crisis. Many challenges will unfold on the road to a new  normal, which itself is still distant and undefined. At the same time, it is clear that central banks within  their mandates stand ready to play their part in mitigating the adverse economic consequences of this  global crisis.     Thank you for your attention.           
Fout! Onbekende naam voor documenteigenschap.  5         
       All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 1           Financial System Resilience: Lessons from a real stress   Speech given by Sir Jon Cunliffe, Deputy Governor Financial Stability, Member of the Monetary Policy Committee, Member of the Financial Policy Committee and Member of the Prudential Regulation Committee   Investment Association Webinar, London  Tuesday 9 June 2020    
        All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 2  2      The COVID 19 natural disaster has been the toughest test of the financial system since the global financial crisis 10 years ago.  As the implications of the spread of the virus and the policy measures to contain it became apparent, over a few short weeks, we saw an abrupt and savage pricing down of economic prospects and economic assets across the globe.    Investors, corporates, banks and households went into a defensive crouch, shunning risk, searching for safer havens, and stockpiling liquidity.  Many of the resultant moves were unprecedented.  Bank lending surged as corporates drew down on their liquidity facilities. In March, UK banks’ net lending to corporates shot up to £33 billion, around 30 times the average monthly lending seen last year. The jump was even more striking in the US, where growth in the stock of corporate lending rose by over $600 billion in the first four months of the year, compared to an increase of less than $60 billion for 2019 as a whole.  In financial markets, the FTSE All-Share index fell over 10% on 12 March, the largest one-day fall since 1987. Some high-yield primary debt markets effectively closed: sterling issuance stopped on 13 February and US dollar issuance stopped on 4 March – and remained closed for longer than seen in the financial crisis. Even short-term funding markets for corporates, such as the commercial paper markets, became strained.    Initially, yields on risk-free assets fell rapidly at the end of February and early March due to the flight to safety. However, this became an abrupt and disruptive “dash for cash” in mid-March as investors demand for cash and near-cash assets rose sharply, resulting in selling pressure on usually safe and liquid assets such as government bonds.  Risk free yields began to rise sharply and the financial conditions facing major economies tightened.   The “dash for cash” also spread to foreign exchange markets, given the dollar’s pivotal role in global trade and investment. US dollar funding became particularly difficult to raise in global capital markets; the dollar 
        All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 3  3      appreciated sharply; and FX liquidity deteriorated across all currency pairs as the near one-way demand for dollars drove bid-offer spreads up to three times their normal levels.   Central banks had to take extraordinary action to stabilise markets.  In the UK, the MPC increased the stock of asset purchases by £200 billion to a total of £645 billion, and bought gilts at the fastest rate operationally possible. These gilt purchases - equivalent to nearly a tenth of UK GDP - increased the supply of ‘cash’, reducing market interest rates, and improving liquidity in the gilt market. In the US, the Fed initially announced it would purchase $500 billion in Treasuries, then removed the cap, moving to an open-ended purchase programme.1 In the euro area, the ECB launched a €750 billion Pandemic Emergency Purchase Programme in March.  Over the past decade, asset purchases by central banks have become an established monetary policy tool to support demand.  But in this instance, central banks were clear that their actions were aimed primarily at stabilising markets and preventing financial conditions tightening at the very time that economies needed the exact opposite.  As a result of these central bank interventions, and as fiscal authorities began to provide support to economies entering lockdown, conditions stabilised. Non-financial investment-grade corporate bond spreads are now over 90 basis point lower than their peak in mid-March (but still around 40 basis points higher than their end-2019 levels).2  The COVID crisis is very far from over.  The depth and length of its economic impact remain very uncertain: it is clear that there is likely to be a great deal of pain for the financial sector.  Given the economic hit – a very deep synchronised hit to the global economy – we can expect very significant losses on credit to firms and households.  And future news about the health crisis and consequent policy measures or about geo-political tension, could well spark another very sharp repricing of economic prospects and financial assets.                                                        1 The Fed has launched multiple facilities aimed at reducing the stress in US dollar funding markets This included purchases of US Treasuries, Mortgage-Backed Securities, and Commercial Paper, amongst other facilities. In addition, the Fed has – alongside other major central banks - enhanced existing and introducing new swap lines to accommodate the heightened demand for dollars 2 My colleague Andrew Hauser’s recent speech, ‘Seven moments in Spring’ gives a vivid and excellent account from the central banking ‘front line’ of this extraordinary period. 
        All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 4  4      However, the first phase – the initial shock and adjustment to a far more challenging economic outlook in the near term – has passed.    While it is fresh in the memory, it is important to ask:  how has the financial sector weathered the initial storm? How have the reforms made a great cost and effort since the global financial crisis performed under stress? And, on the basis of what we have seen so far, which, if any, issues are likely to need further attention by the regulatory and supervisory community?   We need, of course, to bear in mind throughout the scale of the current shock.  We have to go back over 300 years to find a similar sudden decline in economic activity.  There is no precedent in modern economic history for the economic impact of ‘lockdown’ and ‘social distancing’.  Nor should we forget that, unlike the global financial crisis, this shock originates in a natural disaster rather than in the failings of the financial sector itself.  But the objective of the reforms of the past 10 years has not just been to make the financial system resilient to the normal run of events or to prevent the financial system itself from generating another crisis.    Given what we learned, 10 years ago, about the cost of a breakdown in the financial system, the objective of the reforms has been precisely to make the financial system resilient to a ‘tail event’ regardless of how and where that event originates.    Our aim has been first to ensure that whatever the shock, it is not amplified and made worse by weaknesses in the financial system and second, that well into the range of very severe adverse events – the so called ‘tail events’ – the financial system is able to support the real economy and dampen the shock.  Assessment  So, measured against that yardstick, how well has the system performed so far?  
        All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 5  5      The centrepiece of the post GFC reforms has been to require banks to hold ‘buffers’ of loss absorbing capital so that they can absorb losses from a very severe shock without the massive deleveraging and the bank failures which caused so much economic damage 10 years ago.    And within the banking system, to strengthen even further the core – the globally and domestically systemic banks which provide the key connections in the financial system and with financial markets.  We have, as I have noted, further to travel through the economic stresses of the COVID crisis. The extent of the economic damage remains very uncertain. But as far as the initial phase is concerned, the banking system has by and large been able to absorb a very sharp financial market shock and the large prospective losses.    In the UK, the desktop stress test carried out by the Financial Policy Committee on the basis of the scenario for the economy in the MPC’s May Monetary policy Report3, indicates the banks could face up to £80bn of credit losses over the next two years.   There is of course great uncertainty about the future evolution of the pandemic, of the health policy measures necessary to contain it and of the consequent economic impact.  The stress test scenario is only one possible economic path through the crisis; more adverse paths are possible.  But even after the very significant losses indicated by the stress test, considerable resilience remains in the core banking system to deal with more adverse outcomes: the impact of the stress test would exhaust a little less than half of the loss absorbing capital buffers in the system.  Liquidity failure, as we learned 10 years ago, can damage the banking system faster than credit impairments. The reforms of the past 10 years have also strengthened the resilience of the core banking system to liquidity shocks.                                                         3 The illustrative scenario features a peak to trough fall in GDP of nearly 30%. Unemployment peaks at nearly 10%, house prices fall by 16% and Bank Rate is held at 0.1% over the three years of the scenario horizon.   
        All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 6  6      The major UK banks went into the COVID crisis holding around £1 trillion in high quality liquid assets, over 4 times what they had going into the global financial crisis. Their aggregate loan-to-deposit ratio is now below 100%, compared to over 130% in 2007. And they have pre-positioned assets at the Bank of England against which they could draw down around £380bn of liquidity.4  A simple thought experiment is perhaps the best illustration of this point.  A similar pandemic could well have struck in the years before the financial crisis.  Had it done so, the overall impact of the FPC stress test would have wiped out nearly all of the aggregate capital in the system and taken banks below their minimum regulatory requirements.5  We would now be dealing with illiquid banks in life preservation mode, cutting back all credit to hoard capital and to remain solvent – in other words a credit crunch and possible bank failures that would make the current economic crisis deeper and the recovery more painful and protracted.  In contrast, the UK banking system has, I have noted, so far been able to absorb the initial surge in demand for credit from firms6 and extend payment holidays to households.  The FPC stress test indicates that banks have the resilience to continue to maintain credit to the real economy.    Admittedly, given the risk around economic prospects and the impact on firms, much of the additional lending that is necessary needs to be supported by government guarantee.  But we would be dealing with a very different credit environment now absent the resilience – both capital and liquidity – that has resulted from the post crisis reforms.  The FPC stress test also illustrates one of the key lessons of the great financial crisis, that if banks have resilience and can use it to help to maintain credit in the real economy in a stress rather than deleveraging, the outcome is in the end better for banks themselves.  The capital they might preserve by deleveraging is                                                       4 Since the 2008/09 financial crisis, the Bank has increased the range of collateral it accepts, which now extends to loans and a wide range of securities. 5 To take a very simplified example: the aggregate CET 1 ratio of major UK banks was around 4.5% in 2007 (compared to over 14% now). A 3.8 percentage point capital drawdown (the drawdown we expect banks to face in the MPC’s illustrative scenario) would have depleted a very significant fraction of the capital banks had available. In reality, the capital drawdown banks would have faced, had the COVID shock happened in 2007, would have been a function of their 2007 balance sheets – so the loan losses may well have been higher than those we pencilled in for banks as part of the illustrative scenario. 6 In the first quarter of the year, major UK banks expanded their net lending to businesses by £20bn (compared to a reduction in net lending of £3bn by these banks in 2019 as a whole. 
        All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 7  7      outweighed by the losses they would suffer from the broader economic damage that would result from a widespread withdrawal of credit.   No financial system of course can be infinitely resilient.  Given its function of providing credit and risk mitigation to firms and households, the banking system is exposed to the real economy. There is inevitably some level of damage to the economy that the banking system cannot weather.  Over the coming months we will learn more about how well the post crisis reforms work under stress.  One particular area of attention will be the usability of the capital and liquidity buffers intended to absorb a tail event shock. The results of the FPC’s desktop stress test reinforces the message that the clue, as they say, is in the name:  the buffers exist precisely to buffer a shock like this.  All elements of the buffers banks now have are intended to be usable in stress. Whether banks continue to draw down on their capital buffers to maintain lending – or whether they react defensively and deleverage to conserve capital, particularly as they approach Maximum Distributable Amount thresholds for restrictions on AT1 coupons, will be a key area for regulators to watch in the coming months.    My initial assessment,  however, on what we have seen is that the UK banking system has demonstrated so far that it is likely to be resilient a pretty long way into the tail of adverse shocks.  The little thought experiment above illustrates that while building resilience in the financial system in good times might seem expensive, it is the better economic bet over the long run.  The other major post crisis reform that we have seen operating under severe stress conditions in recent months is the changes made to derivative markets and particularly the requirement that derivatives trades be prudently ‘margined’ or collateralised against counterparty failure and – where sufficiently standardised – centrally cleared.7  10 years ago, as financial asset prices fell, a complex and under-collateralised web of ‘over the counter’ (OTC) derivative trades between financial market participants was revealed.  The resulting exposures and demands for collateral greatly amplified the stress and uncertainty in the financial system.                                                       7 https://www.oecd.org/g20/summits/pittsburgh/G20-Pittsburgh-Leaders-Declaration.pdf  
        All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 8  8       The aim of the reforms was to ensure that derivatives trades were prudently, transparently and efficiently collateralised.8 The reforms also aimed to ensure that collateral could adjust as smoothly and predictably as possible if asset prices changed sharply in times of stress.    Clearing through central counterparties provided a degree of mutualisation of counterparty credit risk. It also provided greater efficiency through the ability of central counterparties to ‘net off’ opposing flows of margin payments to market participants, reducing the gross liquidity flows around the system that would result from a network of bilateral trades.  Derivatives markets went into the COVID crisis with much greater underlying collateral in the system to protect against counterparty credit failure - with at least $1trn in additional collateral against OTC derivative exposures.9  As financial market asset prices adjusted very sharply in March, margin call, the increasing collateral required to protect against counterparty credit failure, went up sharply also.10  These margin calls were met in the UK and there were no defaults. With one or two small exceptions, the same picture was true internationally.  It is clear however that the need to post additional margin generated sharp liquidity pressure on those on the ‘wrong’ side of derivatives exposures, adding to demand for liquidity in the system.                                                        8 There are two types of margin.  CCPs collect variation margin (usually in cash) as a core part of reducing participants’ counter party credit risk as prices move.  Absent the flow of variation margin, CCPs non-defaulting members would face very substantial losses if a counterparty defaults.  Variation margin is therefore vital, despite the liquidity demands it necessarily entails; and it is not that case that the post-crisis growth in central clearing has increased these demands – especially now that variation margin is routinely exchanged on non-cleared derivatives too.  Indeed the vast multilateral netting sets created by CCPs substantially reduce the volume of variation margin compared to the alternative where the same trades are cleared bilaterally. CCPs also collect ‘initial margin’ to protect their members from potential losses arising from a member default.   In an historically large stress event, the distribution of potential of losses changes, with larger losses becoming more likely, and therefore initial margin calls increased as well.  The increase in initial margin requirements at UK CCPs during the crisis was substantial [add stat] but also relatively gradual – the peak one-day increase in initial margin was considerably smaller than peak one-day variation margin flows through the crisis.  This was in part due to prudent measures taken by CCPs before the crisis to prevent initial margin from falling too far in good times and prevent large or unexpected step changes in initial margin requirements when market volatility starts to rise. 9 FSB (2017) Report on effectiveness of derivatives reforms. 10 Daily variation margin payments to and from UK CCPs peaked at more than £30bn, roughly five times the daily average in January and February.  UK CCPs also collected nearly £60bn in extra initial margin over the first three weeks of March. 
        All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 9  9      It is important, however, to stress that margin is not a bug in the system but rather a core feature. Derivative contracts enable financial market participants to buy and sell what is effectively ‘insurance’ against moves in asset prices.  As asset prices move, the exposure of those who have sold the insurance grows. Margin then increases to protect those who have bought the insurance against the failure of their counterparties.  It is at least partly because of greater margining and central clearing that the market stress in March did not result in widespread concern about counterparty risk – unlike in 2008. Prompt margining (especially variation margin) avoids a situation in which the perceived stress on one major player leads to a panic because of uncertainty about who else might be exposed, how great the exposure is  and whether it  is adequately protected by margin.11  We need to be sure that derivatives clearing and margining can adjust to sharp price changes as efficiently and smoothly as possible. We need also to dampen down as far as possible pro-cyclical effects without reducing appropriate protection against counterparty credit risk. I will return to this later.   Overall, my initial conclusion is that the derivatives reforms pretty much did the job they were intended to do.  Again, a simple thought experiment is illustrative:  counterparty credit risk, unanticipated margin call and the scale of margin related liquidity flows around the system would have been greater and destabilising had the pandemic struck ten years ago.  So if the banking and derivatives markets reforms operated broadly as intended can we conclude that the financial system as whole has – so far – functioned well and proved resilient in the current crisis?  Here the judgement is more difficult.    We have not seen systemic bank failures, credit crunches or ballooning counterparty credit risks.  But we have seen a massive liquidity shock and incipient dysfunction in core financial markets that required central bank intervention on an unprecedented scale.                                                        11 Ben Bernanke has pointed out that panics can be a major cause of credit crunches. Reforms that avoid such panic reduce the likelihood that financial stress transmits to real economy stress. 
        All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 10  10      It is arguable, as I noted at the outset, that the extreme liquidity shock was simply a function of the scale of the economic impact of the COVID crisis, and the central bank response a necessary and unavoidable consequence of a tail event.  Supported by central bank intervention, markets have certainly stabilised.12   Indeed, some seem to have fully recovered their pre-crisis levels. I would reiterate, however, that the crisis is far from over and further negative COVID19 developments could cause financial instability to return.  And although it may seem that all is ‘back to normal’ and we should move on, I think the March episode raises two important and perhaps uncomfortable broad questions – questions to which we will need to return.  First, do we need more resilience, particularly liquidity resilience, in the non-bank parts of the financial system?   We have, as I have set out, made the banking system much more resilient to severe, unanticipated shocks. The banking system, admittedly, plays a core role in our economies.  What would be the costs and benefits of greater resilience in market based finance – which now accounts for around half of the global financial system?  And second, if central banks have to backstop liquidity in financial markets – as they do for solvent banks – how should that be organised and what should be the consequences for the private sector?  These are questions I believe the central bank and regulatory community will need to address.     It is too early for answers to these questions.  And I expect new issues will arise as we progress through this crisis. But we should not lose the insights that the last few months have given us already about how the system functions under stress.                                                        12 Some US equity markets recently reached record highs, both the FTSE 250 and the S&P 500 have gained over 40% from their March lows, and sterling 3m and USD 3m LIBOR rates have come in 70bps and 81bps respectively from their crisis highs 
        All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 11  11      I would at this stage identify a number of areas that will likely merit further consideration in a comprehensive, evidence based, analysis of how stress evolved over the initial phase of the COVID crisis and whether and how market dysfunction could have been prevented without huge central bank intervention.    Market liquidity broke down very quickly in dealer intermediated corporate bond markets and EME asset markets. This, bluntly, was no great surprise.  The potential illiquidity of these markets under stress has been well known to regulatory authorities and market participants for some time.13  These markets are now very large.  The global stock of non-financial corporate bonds at the end of 2019 reached an all-time high of $13.5 trillion, with the stock of emerging market corporate debt around $3trn. We need to examine the extent to which their illiquidity contributed to pressure on asset prices and liquidity elsewhere, given the desire of many of the holders of these assets to shift their portfolios to more defensive positions and to increase cash holdings.   Within the investment fund universe, we need to look at the related question of whether  actual or prospective redemption requests generated additional pressures for funds invested in illiquid assets, how well liquidity management tools operated under stress and whether we saw any emergence of first mover advantages that could have created ‘run’ dynamics.  One important element in the amplification of liquidity pressure appears to have been the unwinding of large positions in interest rate markets, particularly US Treasuries, by very highly leveraged hedge funds. These funds can help to stabilise market prices in normal times by arbitraging small differences that open up between the value of derivatives and the value of the cash instrument on which the derivative is based.    In March, however, these highly leveraged funds appear to have become an amplifier of stress. Sharp changes in government bond prices, margin call and inability to rollover funding forced substantial sales of government bonds by these players (almost $90bn during March) which in turn generated further falls in government bond markets. Moves in government bond prices generated margin call liquidity pressures on pension funds and insurance companies adding to the pressure on core funding markets.                                                        13 See, for example, previous Financial Stability Reports, or the Financial Stability Paper No. 42 “Simulating stress across the financial system: the resilience of corporate bond markets and the role of investment funds”  
        All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 12  12      I have mentioned the role of margin in providing resilience against counterparty credit risk.  Margin call clearly and inevitably puts pressure on those on the wrong side of derivatives contracts.  Given its importance in the system, we need to be as sure as we can that margin call, both between CCPs and clearing members and between clearing members and their clients, is both prudent and justified.   In particular we should look at whether under-calibration of margin in normal times led to ‘catch-up’ margin calls in the stress. We should also revisit whether there is more that can be done to reduce procyclicality of margin call under stress by building larger buffers in normal times. Some jurisdictions have, for example, introduced specific measures to mitigate procyclicality in margin requirements and we should examine how these performed in the March stress.  But given that clearing and margining are important risk mitigants in the system, the answers may lie more in ensuring that that financial market participants, be they hedge funds or pension funds, understand how margin call can evolve in a stress and have the resilience to manage the consequent liquidity pressures.    As the search for liquidity intensified, money market funds (MMFs) came under pressure.  Post crisis reforms in the US and in other jurisdictions had sought to make MMFs stable under stress, to reduce ‘first mover’ advantages and incentives for investors to ‘run’.   However, under the recent stress, MMFs appear again to have been a source of vulnerability in the system. As the demand for liquidity grew and market participants drew down their investments in money markets, MMFs saw substantial withdrawals.  However, as many funds tried to liquidate their assets (largely commercial paper) to meet redemptions, they found the markets effectively closed. Some MMFs came very close to regulatory liquidity thresholds and to the point at which they would have to suspend or ‘gate’ withdrawals, which could in turn have triggered contagion to other MMFs and severely exacerbated the overall stress in the financial system. Various direct and indirect central bank actions helped to avoid this outcome.   We need to look at whether, despite the post crisis reforms, investors conceive of MMFs as equivalent to deposit accounts and whether MMFs have the resilience to meet the meet the consequent liquidity demands 
        All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 13  13      in a severe stress.  We should also explore the liquidity characteristics under stress of some of the underlying assets, like bank commercial paper, on which MMFs depend for liquidity.   As well as looking at what drove and amplified the search for liquidity, we will I think need to examine why the core funding markets were overwhelmed by the demand, amplifying further the pressures in the system. There have been warning signs that these markets might prove unable to transmit liquidity under stressed conditions.14   It is not clear whether this is due to the role of regulation such as the leverage ratio as has been claimed or to the increasing risks to dealers as government bond prices fell or some combination of the two.  But as with CCP margin, it is important that we remember the reasons for the regulatory reforms in this area.   As I have noted, one of the key differences between this crisis and the financial crisis has been the ability of the core banks to absorb a very severe financial market shock. We should not put that at risk by weakening the regulation of banks.  If we want to increase the overall resilience of the system we cannot simply lower resilience in one area in order to strengthen it in another. Rather we need to look at other ways to reduce surges in the demand for liquidity and improve the supply of liquidity under stress.                                                            14 See BIS (2017) ‘Repo market functioning’ https://www.bis.org/publ/cgfs59.htm  and BIS (209) ‘September stress in dollar repo markets: passing or structural?’ https://www.bis.org/publ/qtrpdf/r_qt1912v.htm  
        All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 14  14      Conclusion  The issues outlined above are neither an exhaustive nor a definitive list.  There are other lessons about the financial system under stress that we will inevitably learn as this crisis progresses. Not all of these will be in the financial market and non-bank sectors.  We will, as I have said inevitably learn more about the performance under stress of the banking capital regime and the usability of banks’ capital buffers.   But the list, I think illustrates two important points.   First, as we learned 10 years ago, we need to look at how the system as a whole has performed under stress and whether and how it might be strengthened.  Focussing on the resilience of one or another element without understanding its broader effect will give us a false picture.  Second, such a comprehensive assessment, cannot be done by one jurisdiction or one international standard setter.  And in this respect, one of the other, major planks of the post financial crisis reforms, the creation of the international Financial Stability Board (FSB) – has put us in a far better position than ten years ago.  The FSB has been active and in crisis mode from the outset of this crisis.  It has enabled jurisdictions and international standard setters to work together, under its umbrella to share experience, to assess risks to financial stability, and in to discuss ‘what works’ (and what doesn’t work) in addressing those risks.  The FSB’s assessments also provide input to the political level of the G20. And to ensure national authorities respond in a consistent way, the FSB agreed Principles, adopted by the G20, which reiterate commitment to common international standards, using their inbuilt flexibility including buffers, while leaning against regulatory rollback.    Going forward, and just as after the global financial crisis, the FSB can and should  enable us to bring together the various perspectives in the central bank and regulatory communities to determine whether we do indeed need more resilience in the system and, if so, how to achieve it.   
Benjamin E Diokno: UBS conference call opening statementOpening statement by Mr Benjamin E Diokno, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, thecentral bank of the Philippines), of the UBS conference call, 24 April 2020.*   *   *To our stakeholders from the financial markets, my colleagues from the Bangko Sentral ngPilipinas (BSP), and to other participants of this conference call, good afternoon.The BSP would like to thank UBS for inviting us to speak to its clients to discuss pressing issuesthat concern the markets at this time.The entire world is confronted with one of the most difficult challenges to mankind in the last 100years. The COVID-19 pandemic has led to many deaths and has forced many economies intosharp fall.The Philippines is no exception. Given the uncertainty as to when the pandemic will subside, theestimated impact of COVID-19 on the domestic economy, in a worst-case scenario, is estimatedto be between negative 1 percent and zero. The more upbeat scenario is a growth of betweenone and two percent.As you know the Philippines was in a strong position going into this pandemic. The reforms we implemented in the past and our prudent management of the economy createdfiscal and monetary space, which we are putting to good use as we address the challenges fromCOVID-19. Other countries are not as well positioned.We are taking an all-of-government approach to deal with the pandemic, with the primary focusset on addressing public health needs. Measures to ease the adverse impact of the crisis onincomes of households and firms are also being undertaken.The Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP) is one with the national government and the entire nationin mitigating the impact of the outbreak on livelihoods and lives—that is, in a manner that isdecisive, prompt, and efficient. Indeed, extraordinary times call for extraordinary measures.As you may have already read in news reports, the BSP has implemented many unprecedentedmeasures to soften the blow of the pandemic on the economy, and we stand ready to do more ifnecessary.Among these measures, which help ensure much needed liquidity at this critical time and shoreup confidence, are the following:A cumulative 125-basis-point reduction in the monetary policy rate since February 2020;Purchases of government securities in the secondary market;Reduction in the Overnight Reverse Repurchase (RRP) Volume Offering—this encouragescounterparties to lend in the interbank market or re-channel funds into loans or GS;P300 billion worth of repurchase agreement with the national government;A 200-basis-point cut in the reserve requirement ratios of universal and commercial banks,as well as non-bank financial institutions with quasi-banking functions (NBQBs);Counting of loans to micro, small, and medium enterprises (MSMEs) as part of banks’compliance with reserve requirements;Suspension of the term deposit facility auctions for certain tenors;Temporary reduction to zero in the term spread on the peso rediscounting loans relative to 1 / 2BIS central bankers' speeches
the overnight lending rate;Time-bound relaxation of various regulations pertaining to compliance reporting, calculationof penalties on required reserves, and single borrower limits; andThe BSP stands prepared to use its full range of monetary instruments and to deploy regulatoryrelief measures as needed in line with its price and financial stability mandates.With all these measures, the BSP, as the country’s monetary authority, together with fiscalauthorities and other departments, aim to manage a soft landing for the Philippines and to ensurethat an economic takeoff begins quickly once the pandemic fades.The market seems to be responding favorably. The peso is fairly stable, the stock market hasbounced back from recent lows, and CDS spreads of Philippine government bonds remaincompetitive.If financial markets — which are sometimes inclined to have kneejerk reaction — are showingsome signs of confidence at this challenging time, then there is basis for everyone to be(cautiously) optimistic as well.In closing, I would like to highlight that the Philippines has entered this difficult time with sufficienttools and buffers.We have sound macro economic fundamentals, a stable banking sector, and the much neededfiscal and monetary space, which allow us to roll out significant relief and mitigating measureswhile keeping the economy afloat.These buffers, plus the relief and mitigating measures from the BSP and the nationalgovernment, allow us to look forward to the time when the Philippines will be firing on all cylindersagain.Thank you very much, and I look forward to answering your questions. 2 / 2BIS central bankers' speeches
      2 The Terrace, PO Box 2498, Wellington 6140, New Zealand  Telephone 64 4 472 2029 Online at www.rbnz.govt.nz             A Near Horizon Seizing the opportunities and managing the risks in the transition to net zero: The importance of climate-related financial disclosures   Remarks delivered to a virtual roundtable   On 28 May 2020  By Adrian Orr, Governor        
 2       Talofa lava, tēnā koutou katoa, welcome everyone  Thank you to the organisers – McGuinness Institute, Simpson Grierson, and the Climate Disclosure Standards Board – for gathering us all for this important discussion.   Thank you also to Mr Mark Carney. I want to acknowledge your role in shifting the global financial system to a more sustainable perspective. You shook us awake with your ‘Breaking the Tragedy of the Horizons’1 speech in 2015. Now, only five years on from your speech, a common topic across central banks and financial regulators more broadly is how can we best assess and address climate risks.   I also acknowledge the Climate Change Minister, James Shaw, and his personal commitment, financial expertise and leadership on this very important issue.   Today I will speak briefly to three points:    Why climate matters to New Zealand’s financial stability;   The Reserve Bank’s climate strategy; and   The impact of COVID-19 in terms of risks and current opportunities.  Why climate matters - New Zealand’s Financial Stability   We use the Māori legend of Tāne Māhuta to tell the story of the Reserve Bank (Te Pūtea Matua).   Tāne Māhuta – god of the forest and birds – separated the earth mother (Papatūānuku) and sky father (Ranginui) so that the sun could shine in and life could flourish. Thereafter, Tāne Māhuta served as the kaitiaki (guardian) of the forest ecosystem – protecting against threats and enhancing the wellbeing of everyone within it. Hold on to that image of Tāne letting the sunshine in – I’ll get back to it.   At the Reserve Bank, we are the kaitiaki of the financial system tasked to maintain and enhance financial stability. Assessing material risks to banks and insurers, and the financial system as an ecosystem, is our core business.  We see financial stability being best maintained when all relevant risks are adequately identified, priced, and allocated to those best able to manage them2. Climate change and its associated risks provide a direct challenge to financial stability. The risks are material but extremely difficult to identify, price, allocate, and manage with accuracy.                                                 1 https://www.bis.org/review/r151009a.pdf 2 https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/research-and-publications/speeches/2019/speech2019-07-11#fn7; https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/about-us/the-journey-of-te-putea-matua-our-tane-mahuta  
 3      In the jargon, ‘market failure’ is rife.    We simply do not know the true scope and scale of the environmental risks we take on during our daily economic activities. Likewise, many of the material costs of our economic decisions are ‘externalised’, that is, borne by others including future generations. There is no obvious market or price for selling climate risk, and hence no personal reward for managing it. And market participants often take a short-term, myopic, view in their decision making, pushing longer term problems to the never-never.   What this means is that we will never have perfect information on the risks of climate change. However, firms’ disclosure on how they identify and manage climate change risks greatly assist to sharpen our focus. After all, it is what gets measured that generally gets managed. And it is far often better to imperfectly measure something than ignore it completely.   What we already know is that climate change holds far-reaching implications for New Zealand’s financial system.   These implications include physical impacts such as sea level rise and drought. For example, the National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research (NIWA) estimates $12.5 billion of property is already exposed to extreme coastal flooding in New Zealand, and that each 10cm of sea level rise puts another $2.4 billion of assets at risk.3 Climate change also implies transition impacts - such as ‘flight shame’ or a shift to plant-based protein that will pose unique challenges for our highly concentrated export economy.  Agriculture is already staring down the challenge of a triple whammy: emission pricing, changes in consumer demand, and more extreme weather.  The Reserve Bank’s climate strategy  Our climate strategy at the Reserve Bank has three avenues: incorporating the impact of climate change into our core functions; managing our direct impact on the climate; and leading through experience and collaboration.   Firm disclosure of climate risks assists all three avenues. Disclosure will enable risk assessment and mitigation, and incentivise investment in emission reduction and adaptation. Disclosure does this by subtly changing the rules to the game—without changing the game. Firms’ behaviour will change by directing attention to climate-related risks – ‘you manage                                                 3 Niwa (2019) Coastal Flooding Exposure under Future Sea-level Rise for New Zealand.  Accessed at https://www.deepsouthchallenge.co.nz/projects/national-flood-risks-climate-change. A second study, of modelling flooding from rainfall and rivers, estimated that around 411,000 were currently exposed along with 20 airports and 3400km of electricity transmission lines. Niwa (2019). New Zealand Fluvial and Pluvial Flood Exposure. Accessed at https://www.deepsouthchallenge.co.nz/projects/national-flood-risks-climate-change 
 4     what you measure’.  While investors’ behaviour will change as they see both climate risks and opportunities.   Even then leadership will still be needed.   Our survey of New Zealand insurers and banks last year found broad concern that climate change exposed the financial system to significant risk. But, we disappointingly found scant evidence that the climate risk concerns are influencing daily business decisions.    The lack of action may relate to the partial awareness. Only 60 percent of surveyed banks and one third of insurers disclose some climate-related information.4 This creates inconsistent information and comparability, leading to uninformed decisions.    Hence, we support the mandatory disclosure of climate risk, especially one that is collaborative in approach with industry. There are important challenges to making disclosure effective in meeting New Zealand’s carbon reduction objectives - including standardised measures and climate scenarios, and sound data management and interpretation. We need to get this right.   Recently we stepped up our supervisory engagement on the identification and management of climate risks amongst New Zealand financial institutions. We also lead the Council of Financial Regulators’ work on the climate challenge, including helping to develop a shared programme to train regulators in climate risk disclosure.   We do so with haste because any delay in disclosing climate risk increases the likelihood of a disruptive step change to our economic prosperity and social cohesion. Disclosure plays a key role in ensuring a smooth transition to a low carbon emission future.   We encourage those banks and insurers who don’t already disclose climate-related information to hurry up and do so. You need to support our collective objective of enhanced financial stability.   We will keep going harder on climate. As a member of the Network for Greening the Financial System we are working with 66 central banks, supervisory agencies and international financial institutions to develop a coordinated response to climate. As part of this, we are looking at options for better managing our own balance sheet to mitigate climate change risk and promote climate change adaptation more broadly in New Zealand.   The impact of COVID-19  Like climate change, COVID-19 highlights interdependencies between economic prosperity, environmental sustainability, and social inclusion. COVID-19 has done something climate                                                 4 https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/financial-stability/financial-stability-report/fsr-may-2019/industry-survey-on-the-potential-impacts-of-climate-change 
 5     change has struggled to do: engage everyone on Earth.  We have all been disrupted. As the Economist newspaper noted last week: “Following the pandemic is like watching the climate crisis with your finger jammed on the fast-forward button.”  Our current response to COVID-19 in New Zealand shows that when the risk is acute, we can act together in a powerful, effective response. This is motivating: with climate change the risk is also acute.   The current economic regeneration challenge requires bringing forth opportunities to reduce carbon emissions and adapt. We need to ensure that whatever we rebuild, reshape or invest in now is sustainable, long term in its horizon, helps us build climate resilience, and benefits generations to come.  The task is significant but, as has been said, ‘The best time to plant a tree is 20 years ago. The second best time is now’.   Conclusion  I’ll return to Tāne Māhuta and his efforts to let the sunshine in so life could flourish. Disclosure is a tool to let in the sunshine. Better information to make better decisions. The degree to which climate change remains a ‘tragedy of the horizons’ depends on our ability to make better decisions today.  Thank you.  
Ravi Menon: Singapore's financial sector agile and resilient amidCovid-19Edited transcript of fireside chat by Mr Ravi Menon, Managing Director of the Monetary Authorityof Singapore, at ACI Live Aid: Financial Markets Give Back, 29 May 2020.*   *   *Operational ResilienceThe financial sector has been quite remarkably resilient in the face of Covid-19.All financial services have remained open, except those involving face-to-faceinteractions with customers outside of bank branches.During the circuit breaker period, 85% of workers in the financial industry have beenable to work from home. MAS itself is close to 90% of staff working from home.I am sure there is some degradation of productivity but, by and large, the sector hasbeen able to function.We are grateful for the strong investments that Singapore’s financial sector has made in digitaltransformation over the last five to six years.This has put the financial industry in a good place during the circuit breaker.If our financial sector had not made these investments - imagine if there was no retailelectronic payment system, or if there were no infrastructure for digital banking orselling insurance online or trading from home - we would be in a much worse situationtoday.A good part of financial sector activities has moved on to virtual platforms.The current situation is of course not without its challenges.Many financial institutions have had to make significant adjustments to the newenvironment.The growth rate of the financial sector, while stellar in Q1, will be much slower throughthe rest of the year, because underlying economic activity will be weak.But in terms of being able to function and operate amid the circuit breaker, the financialsector’s performance has been quite heartening.Foreign Exchange TradingMany of you are from the foreign exchange and treasury business. FX and treasury has been oneof the better performing segments in the financial industry.Singapore’s FX market has been resilient – it was able to manage the volatility fromthe global impact of COVID-19.FX trading volumes in March hit a record high because people were hedging,offloading, and readjusting their investment positions. Activity has now come down to amore normal level.Spreads have widened.  This is to be expected in times like these.  But spreads havenot widened unduly. There is sufficient liquidity in the system.Having a robust infrastructure in place to support swings in trading activities has been important.1 1 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
Especially useful was the electronic trading infrastructure for FX, which MAS has beenworking with industry on for the last few years.We want the pricing and matching engines to be based here, and not have to wait forprices to be matched in London, New York, or Tokyo, because there is still a time lagtaken to route orders to these markets. Sometimes there are execution errors withthese lags, especially during periods of trading volatility.MAS has gotten very good feedback on the growing electronic FX trading system in Singapore.Singapore has attracted key liquidity providers and platforms to base their pricing andmatching engines here.We already have about seven banks and non-banks who have moved these activitiesto Singapore. Now, we have got another two global banks joining us.So even during this period, we are seeing positive, encouraging developments on theFX front.Upskilling Industry WorkforceTalent development and upskilling the industry workforce is another key area that MAS has beenfocusing on during this period, so that finance professionals are able to function effectively andhave a competitive advantage in the future.During this period of slower growth, MAS has been working with financial institutions to retaintheir talent, use the opportunity to upskill their human capital, and explore ways to build longer-term capabilities in digital functionalities, so that the industry can emerge stronger from thecrisis. Last month, in April, MAS announced a S$125 million package, basically to support smallerfinancial institutions and FinTech firms, through the downturn.As part of this package, we launched a training allowance grant, which allows financialinstitutions, especially the smaller ones and FinTechs, to make use of the downtime to train anddeepen the capabilities of their employees.We also set up a new digital acceleration grant.The larger financial institutions are able to invest heavily in digital platforms and digitalcapabilities. The smaller ones do not have the capacity to do that.This digital acceleration grant will help smaller financial institutions and FinTechs adoptdigital solutions to strengthen their operational resilience during this period, improvetheir process efficiency, risk management, and customer service.The take-up has been very encouraging. More than 120 applications have come in.The first batch of applicants have already gotten their grants.New OpportunitiesWhat does the future look like for financial services, post-Covid?  It is an important question thatwe are quite focused on at MAS.  A lot has been written about how the post-Covid world mightlook like.  I think it is a bit too early to tell, but some broad trends are discernible.First, the financial sector needs to be able to operate effectively with safe management.It is going to take quite a while before we find a vaccine or treatment for Covid-19. Thismeans the virus is going to be with us for a while and, with it, the risk of renewedoutbreaks of infections.2 2 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
So, the financial industry must prepare itself to operate in a safe manner, amid theongoing risk of pandemic.This could include changes in office layouts, the way transactions are carried out,everything we do has to take into account public health considerations.Second, and an obvious one, is digitalisation.There has been more digitalisation in the last two months than people had expected tosee over the next five years. This acceleration is going to be with us.Once people have gotten used to live digitally – remote working, e-commerce, tele-medicine – the economy and society are going to change in a variety of ways.The financial sector is well-plugged into digitalisation. Those financial institutions thatadopt deeper end-to-end digitalisation, who are able to use digital platforms for theirbusiness operations that today are conducted in person or on paper, are going to havea strong competitive advantage.New opportunities in particular areas of financial services are harder to tell.Impact investing may become a stronger growth opportunity.We have already seen some financial institutions launching impact funds to seekhigher returns by investing in companies which are focused on combating thepandemic or providing solutions to deal with the associated health risks.Healthcare and supply chain resilience have taken on added importance, and thereseems to be interest among asset managers to invest in these areas. Pandemic risk insurance is another area that might see good growth.There is now a much heightened awareness of pandemic risks. Although pandemicrisk insurance has been around for some time, it never really took off.I think you are going to find demand for risk management and insurance solutions toaddress some of these pandemic-related areas of risk.The financial sector is fundamentally in the business of risk management.  Covid-19 representsthe materialisation of an extreme kind of risk.  To the extent there is greater recognition of risks ofall kinds and consequent demand for effective risk management solutions, the financial sectorwill have an important role to play in the years ahead.It is hard to tell at this point what the specific growth opportunities will be.  We just have to watchvery closely how these trends unfold.  But overall, MAS is undiminished in its optimism andconfidence in the prospects for the financial industry in Singapore.The circuit breaker refers to the tightened restrictions on movements and gatherings of people imposed from 7April to 1 June 2020, aimed at slowing the spread of the Covid-19 virus in Singapore.BNY Mellon and Deutsche Bank are the two new players. The existing seven are Citibank, Standard CharteredBank, UBS, JP Morgan, BNP Paribas, XTX, and Jump Trading.12 3 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
Yakiv Smolii: National Bank of Ukraine press briefing - monetarypolicy statementSpeech by Mr Yakiv Smolii, Governor of the National Bank of Ukraine, at a press briefing onmonetary policy, Kyiv, 23 April 2020.*   *   *Dear colleagues,Please be informed that the Board of the National Bank of Ukraine has decided to cut the keypolicy rate to 8% per annum. The continued monetary easing aims to support the economyduring the period of pandemic and quarantine.What inflation developments followed the last monetary policy meeting?In March–April, inflation remained even lower than the NBU had expected, despite thetemporary price growth in the first weeks of the quarantine. Last month, inflation declined to2.3%.Price growth was restrained by three major factors.First, lower global energy prices.Second, residual effects of last year’s appreciation of the hryvnia.Third, a larger supply of raw foods.These factors outweighed the effect from the weakening of the domestic currency in March andthe panic buying of some goods in the first weeks of the quarantine.According to preliminary data from NBU online monitoring, inflation remains low in April, at lessthan 3%. High demand for essential goods waned quickly. As a result, prices for most foodproducts and medicines, which had grown in the first weeks of the quarantine, have declined inrecent weeks.The foreign exchange market also calmed. In March, with foreign currency supply on theinterbank market remaining almost unchanged, a spike in demand put a depreciation pressureon the hryvnia. However, in April not only did demand drop below the level of supply, but also thenet supply of foreign currency is now even higher than it was in February, before the epidemicand quarantine began in Ukraine.Therefore, the hryvnia strengthened somewhat this month, and the NBU can cautiously resumepurchases of excess foreign currency from the market in order to replenish the internationalreserves.How will inflation behave in the future?In 2020, inflation will remain within the target range of 5% +/- 1 pp. Price growth willaccelerate moderately in the coming months, to reach 6% at the end of 2020.Fiscal and monetary policy measures that are aimed to support businesses and households willpartially offset the decline in consumer demand. However, consumer demand will remainsubdued for long after the quarantine ends. This will keep inflation from growing above the targetlevel this year.Inflation will also be contained by declining global energy prices, which will continue to influencedomestic fuel prices. 1 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
At the same time, the increase in inflation compared with the current level will be primarily drivenby a pass through from the recent depreciation of the hryvnia.In Q1 2021, inflation will temporarily deviate from the target range against a low comparisonbase. Afterwards, it will decrease and stabilize at the medium-term target of 5%.  This level willbe achieved thanks to the NBU’s prudent monetary policy and a more restrained fiscal policyafter the pandemic ends and economic activity recovers.What will be the overall state of the Ukrainian economy?The economy of Ukraine will contract by 5% in 2020 in the wake of the global crisis andthe quarantine imposed to overcome the pandemic. The adverse impact of the pandemic onthe Ukrainian economy is expected to be relatively short-term, but strong. The quarantine hasalready affected business activity, consumption, and employment. A decrease in global demandhas also limited export opportunities for Ukraine. According to NBU estimates, the effect of thesefactors will be the most pronounced in Q2 2020.However, a gradual lifting of quarantine restrictions will allow the economy to recoverquickly in H2 2020. Loose fiscal and monetary policies will contribute to the economic recovery.An increase in budgetary spending by the government to overcome the crisis, along with theNBU’s actions to support the banking system, will mitigate the negative impact the pandemic hason the economy.The economy will resume growth at round 4% in the following years.Overall, the pandemic has a mixed impact on macroeconomic indicators: for some ofthem it is negative, while being even positive for other.In particular, the NBU revised the current account deficit for 2020 downwards. This year, thedeficit will be 1.7% of GDP, although projected at 3.2% in the January macroeconomic forecast.Imports of goods to Ukraine will decrease more than exports. Amid the quarantine and lowerglobal prices, Ukraine will reduce its purchases of energy and the majority of nonessential goods.The pandemic will affect Ukrainian exports less, as demand for food products remains strong.At the same time, the decline in remittances from labor migrants will be more than offset byUkrainians spending less on foreign travel.The current account deficit will widen again once economic activity rebounds globally and inUkraine. There are also several reasons for this. Next year, Ukraine is expected to see a drop ingas transit revenues, as well as pent-up demand for consumer goods from households and forinvestment imports from businesses. Despite that, the current account deficit will remainacceptable, at 3% to 4% of GDP, as envisaged in the NBU’s January forecast.What does the realization of this forecast depend on?Continued cooperation with the IMF remains the key assumption of this macroeconomicforecast.Ukraine is close to having a new aid program approved by the IMF Executive Board. The NBU’srevised forecast envisages that Ukraine will receive the first tranche of about USD 2 billion in Q2.First, this will cover the state budget deficit, which has increased to 7.5% of GDP. This willenable Ukraine to confidently pass through the period of peaking debt repayments, andfinance measures to support businesses and households at a time when business activity isslowing down, employment and tax revenues are falling, and foreign investors are leaving 2 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
emerging markets.Second, financing from the IMF and other official international partners will help maintainUkraine’s international reserves at USD 27 to 29 billion this year and in the coming years.In this light, signing a new aid program with the IMF is the main prerequisite for maintainingmacro-financial stability in Ukraine during the global crisis. Therefore, the absence of a programwith the IMF remains the main risk to this forecast.Another important risk to the outlined macroeconomic forecast could arise from a longer-lasting novel coronavirus pandemic and, consequently, longer-lasting quarantinemeasures being required to overcome the outbreak.This will have a direct influence on how quickly the global and Ukrainian economies recover.Other risks also remain significant. They include:an escalation of the military conflict in eastern Ukrainea drop in the harvest of grain, fruit and vegetable crops in Ukraine in the wake of unfavorableweatherthe higher volatility of global food prices, driven by global climate change and the risk ofstronger protectionist measures.Why did the NBU decide to cut the key policy rate by 2 pp?Like most countries, Ukraine has found itself in a situation in which the economy needssignificant support because of weaker business activity and falling consumption andemployment. Moderate inflation pressures leave room for that.Other central banks are actively cutting their key policy rates and providing additional monetarystimulus. These countries are also trying to find the reasonable boundary beyond whichproductive stimulus to the economy becomes an excessive desire to flood the economy withmoney, which could undermine macrofinancial stability.In view of the above, the NBU continued to ease monetary policy, by cutting the key policy rate by2 pp, to 8%. Together with other measures taken by the NBU, this will provide the economy withthe impetus required to provide support for households and businesses in these difficult times,and to ensure that business activity picks up quickly once the quarantine is lifted. At the sametime, these measures will not threaten macrofinancial stability in Ukraine.How does the NBU intend to change the key policy rate in future?The central bank plans to cut its key policy further, to 7% in the current year.In deciding how quickly the key policy rate can be decreased to that level, the NBU will take intoaccount:how talks with the IMF progresshow the coronavirus pandemic develops and how quickly quarantine measures are liftedwhat anti-crisis measures other governments and central banks adopt.The NBU leaves open the possibility of a greater easing in monetary policy this year if a fall inconsumer demand due to quarantine measures and weaker business activity put strongerdownward pressure on inflation than is currently expected.Before we proceed to the questions and answers session, I have an announcement to 3 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
make.Over the last month, the NBU has been actively developing a set of tools to support theeconomy. These tools will enable the NBU to provide banks with greater access to financing,which they could use for lending to the real economy. This should increase the stimulus providedby the cut in the key policy rate.The NBU seeks to enable banks to help the economy get back on track for growth oncethe quarantine is lifted.All of these measures will be introduced gradually in April–June.First, starting next week, the NBU plans to extend the term of the refinancing loans thatare granted through weekly tenders, from 30 to 90 days.Second, the central bank intends to expand its list of eligible collateral that banks canuse to obtain financing using standard liquidity support instruments. The NBU is looking intothe possibility of incorporating government-guaranteed corporate bonds and municipalbonds into the pool of eligible collateral.Third, the central bank is finalizing an interest rate swap tool banks can rely on tominimize interest rate risk. The tool is expected to become available in Q2.The NBU will launch long-term refinancing loans with terms of up to five years. Theseloans will be issued at a floating interest rate and secured with the same collateral as loansthat are granted through tenders. The NBU is currently finalizing technical preparations forthe introduction of this tool, and plans to hold the first auction on granting long-termrefinancing loans as early as the first half of May.This tool will serve as an additional guarantee for maintaining sufficient liquidity in the bankingsystem if the sentiment of financial market participants deteriorates due to the spread of thecoronavirus infection.The NBU also expects that banks will be able to use this refinancing tool to support the economythrough lending more actively to projects that require long-term investment, such asinfrastructure projects. This will help restore business activity and reduce unemployment.Thank you for your attention! 4 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
Christine Lagarde: ECB press conference - introductory statementIntroductory statement by Ms Christine Lagarde, President of the European Central Bank, and MrLuis de Guindos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 4 June 2020.*   *   *Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are very pleased to welcome you to our pressconference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing Council,which was also attended by the Commission Executive Vice-President, Mr Dombrovskis.Incoming information confirms that the euro area economy is experiencing an unprecedentedcontraction. There has been an abrupt drop in economic activity as a result of the coronavirus(COVID-19) pandemic and the measures to contain it. Severe job and income losses andexceptionally elevated uncertainty about the economic outlook have led to a significant fall inconsumer spending and investment. While survey data and real-time indicators for economicactivity have shown some signs of a bottoming-out alongside the gradual easing of thecontainment measures, the improvement has so far been tepid compared with the speed atwhich the indicators plummeted in the preceding two months. The June Eurosystem staffmacroeconomic projections see growth declining at an unprecedented pace in the secondquarter of this year, before rebounding again in the second half, crucially helped by the sizeablesupport from fiscal and monetary policy. Nonetheless, the projections entail a substantialdownward revision to both the level of economic activity and the inflation outlook over the wholeprojection horizon, though the baseline is surrounded by an exceptional degree of uncertainty.While headline inflation is suppressed by lower energy prices, price pressures are expected toremain subdued on account of the sharp decline in real GDP and the associated significantincrease in economic slack.In line with its mandate, the Governing Council is determined to ensure the necessary degree ofmonetary accommodation and a smooth transmission of monetary policy across sectors andcountries. Accordingly, we decided on a set of monetary policy measures to support theeconomy during its gradual reopening and to safeguard medium-term price stability.First, the Governing Council decided to increase the envelope for the pandemic emergencypurchase programme (PEPP) by €600 billion to a total of €1,350 billion. In response to thepandemic-related downward revision to inflation over the projection horizon, the PEPP expansionwill further ease the general monetary policy stance, supporting funding conditions in the realeconomy, especially for businesses and households. The purchases will continue to beconducted in a flexible manner over time, across asset classes and among jurisdictions. Thisallows us to effectively stave off risks to the smooth transmission of monetary policy.Second, we decided to extend the horizon for net purchases under the PEPP to at least the endof June 2021. In any case, we will conduct net asset purchases under the PEPP until theGoverning Council judges that the coronavirus crisis phase is over.Third, the Governing Council decided to reinvest the maturing principal payments from securitiespurchased under the PEPP until at least the end of 2022. In any case, the future roll-off of thePEPP portfolio will be managed to avoid interference with the appropriate monetary policystance.Fourth, net purchases under our asset purchase programme (APP) will continue at a monthlypace of €20 billion, together with the purchases under the additional €120 billion temporaryenvelope until the end of the year. We continue to expect monthly net asset purchases under theAPP to run for as long as necessary to reinforce the accommodative impact of our policy rates,and to end shortly before we start raising the key ECB interest rates. 1 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
Fifth, we intend to continue reinvesting, in full, the principal payments from maturing securitiespurchased under the APP for an extended period of time past the date when we start raising thekey ECB interest rates, and in any case for as long as necessary to maintain favourable liquidityconditions and an ample degree of monetary accommodation.Sixth, we decided to keep the key ECB interest rates unchanged. We expect them to remain attheir present or lower levels until we have seen the inflation outlook robustly converge to a levelsufficiently close to, but below, 2% within our projection horizon, and such convergence hasbeen consistently reflected in underlying inflation dynamics.Together with the substantial monetary policy stimulus already in place, today’s decisions willsupport liquidity and funding conditions in the economy, help to sustain the flow of credit tohouseholds and firms, and contribute to maintaining favourable financing conditions for allsectors and jurisdictions, in order to underpin the recovery of the economy from the coronavirusfallout. At the same time, in the current rapidly evolving economic environment, the GoverningCouncil remains fully committed to doing everything necessary within its mandate to support allcitizens of the euro area through this extremely challenging time. This applies first and foremostto our role in ensuring that our monetary policy is transmitted to all parts of the economy and toall jurisdictions in the pursuit of our price stability mandate. The Governing Council, therefore,continues to stand ready to adjust all of its instruments, as appropriate, to ensure that inflationmoves towards its aim in a sustained manner, in line with its commitment to symmetry.Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. Thelatest economic indicators and survey results confirm a sharp contraction of the euro areaeconomy and rapidly deteriorating labour market conditions. The coronavirus pandemic and thenecessary containment measures have severely affected both the manufacturing and servicessectors, taking a toll on the productive capacity of the euro area economy and on domesticdemand. In the first quarter of 2020, when containment measures were only in place from mid-March in most countries, euro area real GDP decreased by 3.8%, quarter on quarter. Informationfrom surveys, high-frequency indicators and incoming hard data all point to a further significantcontraction of real GDP in the second quarter. Most recent indicators suggest some bottoming-out of the downturn in May as parts of the economy gradually reopen. Accordingly, euro areaactivity is expected to rebound in the third quarter as the containment measures are easedfurther, supported by favourable financing conditions, an expansionary fiscal stance and aresumption in global activity, although the overall speed and scale of the rebound remains highlyuncertain.This assessment is also broadly reflected in the June 2020 Eurosystem staff macroeconomicprojections for the euro area. In the baseline scenario of the projections, annual real GDP isexpected to fall by 8.7% in 2020 and to rebound by 5.2% in 2021 and by 3.3% in 2022. Comparedwith the March 2020 ECB staff macroeconomic projections, the outlook for real GDP growth hasbeen revised substantially downwards by 9.5 percentage points in 2020 and revised upwards by3.9 percentage points in 2021 and 1.9 percentage points in 2022.Given the exceptional uncertainty currently surrounding the outlook, the projections also includetwo alternative scenarios, which we will publish on our website following this press conference.In general, the extent of the contraction and the recovery will depend crucially on the duration andthe effectiveness of the containment measures, the success of policies to mitigate the adverseimpact on incomes and employment, and the extent to which supply capacity and domesticdemand are permanently affected. Overall, the Governing Council sees the balance of risksaround the baseline projection to the downside.According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, euro area annual HICP inflation decreased to 0.1% inMay, down from 0.3% in April, mainly on account of lower energy price inflation. On the basis ofcurrent and futures prices for oil, headline inflation is likely to decline somewhat further over the 2 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
coming months and to remain subdued until the end of the year. Over the medium term, weakerdemand will put downward pressure on inflation, which will be only partially offset by upwardpressures related to supply constraints. Market-based indicators of longer-term inflationexpectations have remained at depressed levels. While survey-based indicators of inflationexpectations have declined over the short and medium term, longer-term expectations havebeen less affected.This assessment is also reflected in the June 2020 Eurosystem staff macroeconomicprojections for the euro area, which foresee annual HICP inflation in the baseline scenario at0.3% in 2020, 0.8% in 2021 and 1.3% in 2022. Compared with the March 2020 ECB staffmacroeconomic projections, the outlook for HICP inflation has been revised downwards by 0.8percentage points in 2020, 0.6 percentage points in 2021 and 0.3 percentage points in 2022.Turning to the monetary analysis, broad money (M3) growth increased to 8.3% in April 2020,from 7.5% in March. Strong money growth reflects bank credit creation, which is driven to a largeextent by the acute liquidity needs in the economy. Moreover, high economic uncertainty istriggering a shift towards money holdings for precautionary reasons. In this environment, thenarrow monetary aggregate M1, encompassing the most liquid forms of money, continues to bethe main contributor to broad money growth.Developments in loans to the private sector continued to be shaped by the impact of thecoronavirus on economic activity. The annual growth rate of loans to non-financial corporationsrose further to 6.6% in April 2020, up from 5.5% in March, reflecting firms’ need to finance theirongoing expenditures and working capital in the context of rapidly declining revenues. At thesame time, the annual growth rate of loans to households decreased to 3.0% in April, from 3.4%in March, amid consumption constraints due to the containment measures, declining confidenceand a deteriorating labour market.Our policy measures, in particular the very favourable terms for our targeted longer-termrefinancing operations (TLTRO III), should encourage banks to extend loans to all private sectorentities. Together with the measures adopted by national governments and European institutions,they support ongoing access to financing, including for those most affected by the ramificationsof the coronavirus pandemic.To sum up, a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with the signals comingfrom the monetary analysis confirmed that an ample degree of monetary accommodation isnecessary for the robust convergence of inflation to levels that are below, but close to, 2% overthe medium term.Regarding fiscal policies, an ambitious and coordinated fiscal stance remains critical, in view ofthe sharp contraction in the euro area economy. Measures taken should as much as possible betargeted and temporary in nature in response to the pandemic emergency. The three safety netsendorsed by the European Council for workers, businesses and sovereigns, amounting to apackage worth €540 billion, provide important funding support in this context. At the same time,the Governing Council urges further strong and timely efforts to prepare and support therecovery. We therefore strongly welcome the European Commission’s proposal for a recoveryplan dedicated to supporting the regions and sectors most severely hit by the pandemic, tostrengthening the Single Market and to building a lasting and prosperous recovery.We are now ready to take your questions. 3 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
The Governor’sConcluding RemarksAnnual ReportRome, 29 May 2020The Governor’sConcluding RemarksFinancial Year2019126th financial year126th
The Governor’s Concluding RemarksAnnual Report2019 - 126th Financial YearRome, 29 May 2020

Ladies and Gentlemen,Since the beginning of the year, the rapid spread of the new coronavirus all over the world has led to an extremely serious public health emergency. Millions of people have been affected and hundreds of thousands have lost their lives. In order to contain the pandemic, it has been necessary to introduce drastic measures to curtail people’s movements and social interaction, to suspend teaching in schools and universities, and to temporarily close down many productive activities. This is a crisis without parallel in recent history and it is putting the organization and resilience of the economy and society under severe strain.The propagation of the virus has had serious financial repercussions, with a massive shift of funds towards assets deemed to be safer and an abrupt fall in market liquidity. The prices of oil, shares and the bonds of companies with lower credit ratings have plummeted. Sudden capital outflows have led to a marked depreciation in the currencies of the emerging economies. The risks of instability have greatly increased.The immediate effects on worldwide productive activity have been pronounced. Those that have yet to be recorded are hard to estimate. They will reflect non-economic factors first, such as the course of the pandemic, with the possible appearance of new outbreaks, and the duration of the lockdown measures. Much will depend on the scale and effectiveness of the policies launched in various countries, on the confidence of households and firms, and on how much this experience changes our behaviour.Disinflationary  pressures could be strong and persistent, and a sign of this is the decline in short- and long-term inflation expectations in the major economies. The depth of the recession could be magnified by new turbulence in the markets, by the heightening of the protectionist tendencies that have emerged in the last two years, and by the spread of firm bankruptcies across economies sufficient to trigger systemic crises in the financial sector.
BANCA D’ITALIAThe Governor’s Concluding RemarksAnnual Report 20194The international economy and the euro-area economyIn the scenario analysed by the International Monetary Fund in early April, which assumes an abatement of the pandemic in the second half of the year, the easing of the containment measures and the implementation of large-scale public interventions to support the economy, world trade declines by 11 per cent in 2020. GDP could fall by 3 per cent, in contrast to the 3 per cent increase forecast in January; this decrease is likely to be concentrated in the first half of the year, but the strength of the subsequent recovery remains highly uncertain. The risks in this scenario, which foresees poorer performances than those recorded during the global financial crisis, are tilted toward the downside (Figure 1).The Eurosystem’s projections will be published in a few days for the ECB’s Governing Council meeting. According to the European Commission’s estimates, the fall in production in the euro area will be close to 8 per cent, in line with the average of the latest consensus forecasts, which lie within a range of between 5 and 13 per cent.The reaction of governments, central banks, and supervisory authorities in most countries has been swift and substantial. The advanced and emerging economies decided on extensive increases in spending and reductions in tax revenues: the IMF estimates that the measures adopted up to early April were close on average to 6 and 2 percentage points of GDP respectively; other interventions have subsequently been decided. Public guarantees for particularly large sums have also been introduced on bank loans to households and firms in several countries.Central banks have used multiple instruments to make monetary conditions more accommodative, to counter the tensions on financial markets and to support lending to the economy. The composition and size of the measures introduced by the monetary authorities have reflected the specificities of the institutional frameworks and the role played by banks and markets in channelling credit to the various economies, as well as the differences in the seriousness of the repercussions of the pandemic. From the end of February until now, purchases of securities and loans to the private sector have increased the size of central banks’ balance sheets in relation to GDP by 13 percentage points for the Federal Reserve, by around 8 points for the Bank of Japan and the Bank of England and by more than 6 points for the Eurosystem. Net of gold reserves, this share has risen to 33, 114, 34 and 42 per cent respectively (Figure 2).The ECB Governing Council’s intervention was immediate. In order to sustain lending to households and firms, new refinancing operations for banks were introduced and the conditions applied to the existing ones were improved. 
BANCA D’ITALIAThe Governor’s Concluding Remarks5Annual Report 2019The total amount of funds available for targeted longer-term operations was raised to around €3,000 billion; their cost, which was already negative, has been further reduced. To enable intermediaries to benefit in full from these loans and to limit the possible procyclical consequences on the availability of collateral of any downgrades of public and private sector securities by rating agencies, the eligibility criteria and the control measures for the risks applied to assets that can be used as collateral were also relaxed.To counter the risks for economic activity and ensure the orderly transmission of monetary policy to all euro-area countries, which is hindered by widening yield spreads, the Governing Council first strengthened its existing asset purchase programmes (APP), increasing their volume to €360 billion until the end of 2020, and then introduced a new extraordinary programme specifically designed to deal with the consequences of the emergency (the pandemic emergency purchase programme or PEPP). The latter has an envelope of €750 billion this year to carry out purchases of public and private sector securities in a flexible manner, with changes to interventions so as to increase their effectiveness in the time frames, countries and market segments where particular tensions might arise. In March and April, the Bank of Italy purchased Italian government securities at a rate of more than €10 billion a month under the APP alone; there were further interventions, for even greater amounts, as part of the new purchase programme.The range of interventions decided to date is unprecedented; the Council announced that, if necessary, the amount of the extraordinary purchase programme will be increased and its composition reviewed. We stand ready to make further use of the other instruments at our disposal to guarantee that all sectors of the economy can benefit from accommodative borrowing conditions and an ample availability of funds and to ensure that inflation makes a steady return towards the objective of a level below, but close to, 2 per cent.Steps must be taken to counter the significant risk of low inflation and the marked fall in economic activity from translating into a permanent reduction in expected inflation or into the possible resurfacing of the threat of deflation (Figure 3). Also as a result of the high levels of public and private debt in the euro area as a whole, this could trigger a dangerous spiral between the fall in prices and that in aggregate demand.The measures adopted have helped to ease the tensions on financial markets that have nevertheless led to an increase in interest rates in all countries, particularly so in Italy. The yield spread between Italian ten-year government securities and the corresponding German Bund, which had been 
BANCA D’ITALIAThe Governor’s Concluding RemarksAnnual Report 20196less than 140 basis points for most of February, widened rapidly to about 300 points towards mid-March; yesterday it stood at 185 points. The fact that it has narrowed over the last few weeks is comforting; it reflects the action of monetary policy and the European initiatives to support production and labour and to boost investment. However, the spread is still almost double those of Spain and Portugal, at figures not consistent with the fundamentals of our economy, which must however be consolidated and upon which we must build (Figure 4).The action taken by the European supervisory authorities has also aimed to support the economy with measures designed to prevent the rules on prudential treatment of loans from exacerbating the recession. The full use of capital and liquidity buffers has been permitted. It has been made clear that the moratoriums on loans must not have undue consequences for accounting and prudential classification. Banks have been invited not to distribute dividends, not to repurchase their own shares, and to be particularly prudent in paying the variable parts of remuneration to executives. Thanks to these measures, Italy’s banks can count on further capital for continuing to finance the economy and dealing with any losses that might arise on loans.Europe’s institutions have made the use of structural and investment funds and the rules on State aid more flexible and have activated the general escape clause of the Stability and Growth Pact, which permits temporary deviations from public finance objectives. Large-scale expansionary budget measures have been launched at national level. According to the European Commission’s assessments, the size of the discretionary policy interventions in the euro area has exceeded 3 percentage points of GDP on average (Figure 5).The European Council and the Eurogroup have also approved the introduction this month of two new instruments designed to provide financial support to countries affected by the crisis, for a total sum of €340 billion. A European Commission fund that will raise resources on the financial markets will be able to grant loans, at favourable conditions and on a case-by-case basis, worth a total of €100 billion to EU countries to be used for temporary wage supplementation, if steady employment relationships are maintained, or for income support for the self-employed (Support to mitigate Unemployment Risks in an Emergency, SURE).The European Stability Mechanism’s new precautionary credit line (Pandemic Crisis Support credit line) will be able to provide loans with an average duration of up to ten years, to be used for the direct and indirect costs of prevention, treatment and healthcare linked to the pandemic. Each country will be able to obtain a credit line, at almost zero cost, for an amount 
BANCA D’ITALIAThe Governor’s Concluding Remarks7Annual Report 2019not exceeding 2 per cent of their 2019 GDP; the maximum total amount that can be provided is around €240 billion; loans will not be conditional on adopting economic policy measures and will only be subject to oversight on the allocation of the resources used, as part of the European semester.The European Investment Bank has also introduced a series of emergency measures and established the Pan-European Guarantee Fund (EFG) to mobilize resources of up to €200 billion, mainly to support lending to small and medium-sized enterprises. The Commission has just presented a detailed proposal for the establishment of a new recovery instrument (Next Generation EU).The short-term outlook for Italy and the Government’s interventionsThe epidemic took hold in Italy earlier than in other European countries. Drastic social distancing measures were adopted to combat the virus and entire production sectors shut down for several weeks, which contribute nearly 30 per cent of national value added and account for around 35 per cent of total employment. The impact has been mitigated by recourse to teleworking. Other sectors not directly affected by the containment measures were also inevitably hard hit, above all the transport sector.Italy’s GDP recorded a fall of around 5 per cent in the first quarter of 2020; the available indicators point to an even bigger decline in the second quarter. As of mid-May, air traffic was down by over 80 per cent compared with last year, motorway traffic by almost 50 per cent, gas consumption for industrial use by almost 15 per cent and electricity consumption by 6 per cent. In the last few months, business confidence indicators and purchasing managers’ indices have tumbled.The measures to combat the virus have slowed its spread; the gradual but clear decrease in the rate of infection made it possible to start reopening production at the beginning of this month. The consequences of this crisis for our daily lives, for how we interact with others, and for the economic decisions of households and firms, may linger for some time to come. It will take time to return to normality, and things will presumably be different from what we were used to until just a few months ago.The Italian government has acted according to the same priorities that have guided interventions at international level, focusing on the response capacity of the health sector and on help for workers, households and firms. The measures launched between March and May raise this year’s government deficit by around €75 billion or 4.5 per cent of GDP.
BANCA D’ITALIAThe Governor’s Concluding RemarksAnnual Report 20198The social welfare system, already streamlined and reinforced following the sovereign debt crisis, has been temporarily strengthened by extending the possibility of recourse to wage supplementation schemes and lengthening the duration of unemployment benefits. Support has been introduced for the self-employed, as have specific transfers for categories of workers only partly covered by social safety nets and for households in difficulty. There are further interventions in favour of firms, particularly transfers are envisaged for smaller firms whose turnover has fallen sharply. To support the liquidity of small and medium-sized enterprises and of households, it has been made possible to take advantage of legally binding moratoriums on outstanding loans. Additional moratoriums have been implemented through voluntary agreements. The latest available data indicate that as of mid-May, banks had received nearly 2.4 million applications overall, for a total of just under €250 billion; of these, 84 per cent have been approved and 2 per cent refused, while the remaining share is being assessed. To facilitate firms’ access to bank credit, public guarantees have been made available to the tune of around €500 billion, six times the total of those available at the end of 2019. Based on the latest statement of the task force set up to promote the implementation of the measures adopted by the Government to support liquidity, as of 26 May, the Central Guarantee Fund had received about 395,000 loan applications, for a total sum of €18 billion. Some 90 per cent of applications are for loans of up to €25,000, which are entirely guaranteed by the State. The potential loans to medium-sized and large enterprises guaranteed by SACE and currently being evaluated and processed by banks amount to around €18.5 billion. The granting of guarantees is aimed at preventing liquidity shortages from turning into irreversible crisis situations; even assuming normal enforcement rates, the amount of guarantees available means that looking ahead, the public finances may be encumbered with significant outlays, albeit over a longer period. The abundant liquidity provided by the Eurosystem and the guarantees made available by the State are making it possible to meet firms’ demand for emergency funding. In the two months March and April, lending to non-financial corporations increased by €22 billion, after decreasing by €9 billion in the previous 10 months; annualized growth was equal to almost 17 per cent (Figure 6).While indispensable, support measures for firms that focus on bank lending could destabilize their financial structure, increasing their indebtedness to an excessive degree. The Government has enacted measures to facilitate 
BANCA D’ITALIAThe Governor’s Concluding Remarks9Annual Report 2019the capital strengthening of firms. Tax incentives have been introduced for medium-sized enterprises to help both firms making capital increases by the end of 2020 and those subscribing them. The largest firms will benefit from direct forms of public support via the Cassa Depositi e Prestiti.The timing and strength of the recovery that will follow the emergency phase depend on factors that are hard to predict. In mid-May, we presented a scenario analysis for the Italian economy based on alternative hypotheses on the duration and extent of the epidemic, its impact on the global economy and its financial repercussions. The estimates will be updated as part of the Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projection exercise and will be published on 5 June.In the baseline scenario, the fall in production in 2020 would be equal to 9 per cent, greater than that suffered at two different times between 2008 and 2013; the drop would be concentrated in the first two quarters of the year, with a partial recovery starting in the summer (Figure 7). Without the support for demand provided by the fiscal policies set out so far, the contraction in economic activity would exceed 11 per cent. Debt moratoriums and public guarantees on new loans to firms drastically reduce the risk of further amplificatory effects due to a widespread liquidity crisis. In 2021, GDP would recoup about half of the fall. These estimates assume that the containment of contagion at national and global level will continue. A second scenario based on more pessimistic, though not extreme, assumptions regarding the evolution of the epidemic, the magnitude of the drop in world trade and the intensity of the deterioration in financial conditions, would see GDP fall by 13 per cent this year, and a much slower recovery in 2021. In both scenarios, about half of the fall in GDP would be due to the restrictions connected with the provisions suspending business activity and the consequent contraction in disposable income; the remaining half would reflect the slowdown in world trade and the virtual halt in international tourist flows. In any case, the fall in investment would be especially sharp, owing to the marked uncertainty regarding the economic outlook. This is already being confirmed by the traditional surveys of firms, which show a large and widespread downward revision of investment plans; for the first time since 2014, a contraction in investment has been reported, to a similar degree in industry and services, greater for small businesses.The impact of the epidemic on the various economic sectors has been uneven. The immediate effects have been stronger in transport, catering, accommodation, recreation and culture, personal services, and in large 
BANCA D’ITALIAThe Governor’s Concluding RemarksAnnual Report 201910swathes of retail trade, all sectors brought to a near halt by the restrictions imposed by the containment measures. Even with a gradual easing of the distancing measures, recovery in these segments will depend on the time it takes for the fears accumulated in the past months to be dispelled. A significant share of the demand for these sectors’ products and services relies on tourism, to which over 5 per cent of GDP and 6 per cent of employment is directly attributable. After the abrupt stop caused by the epidemic, tourism is expected to recover only partially in the second half of this year and in the next; the recovery will be held back above all by the reduction in the number of foreign visitors. This will result in a narrowing of the contribution of tourism to the surplus of the balance of payments, which has traditionally been large. In retail trade, the upward trend in the use of digital sales channels has intensified. The share of online purchases made with electronic cards, equal to 23 per cent last year, rose to 40 per cent in April, buoyed by the food and clothing sectors, and by retail sales of personal or household goods. In the two months March and April, online purchases of food products and basic necessities from large retailers grew by 170 per cent compared with the same period in 2019. These trends are likely to continue in the coming months, accelerating the recomposition of supply, with further developments in business models featuring a mix of traditional and online sales, including for smaller retailers. This process creates new opportunities, but also transition costs; it will tend to reward the most dynamic and innovative firms.The recession will have significant repercussions on the labour market. Compared with other countries, the impact on employment in Italy is mitigated by the freezing of layoffs and ample recourse to wage supplementation, which has affected around 7 million workers so far, almost half of all private sector payroll employees. Labour market participation has decreased by almost 300,000, discouraged by the worsening economic outlook and the restrictions on mobility and production that remain in some sectors. Against this backdrop, the unemployment rate (which declined to 8.4 per cent in March, almost 1 percentage point lower than in February) does not provide a full picture of the true impact of the epidemic.The fall in economic activity has reduced new employment opportunities, affecting above all young people entering the labour market for the first time, seasonal workers, fixed-term employees, and apprentices. It is having a greater impact on the jobs traditionally performed by self-employed workers and on undeclared labour, which is still too widespread in our country.In the short term, social safety nets are countering the impoverishment of large portions of the population and a widening of economic differences, 
BANCA D’ITALIAThe Governor’s Concluding Remarks11Annual Report 2019increased by the greater presence of low-income workers in the most affected sectors. Limits to the availability of liquid financial assets among lower-income households can amplify the consequences of the shock, leading to a significant increase in the number of households unable to maintain an acceptable standard of living. The recession and the measures adopted to mitigate its consequences are having a strong impact on public finances. For 2020, the Government’s macroeconomic outlook envisages a deficit of 10.4 per cent of GDP and an increase of 21 percentage points in the debt-to-GDP ratio, to 156 per cent. Such a burdensome debt legacy requires full awareness of the scale of the challenges ahead. Italy’s economy must find the strength to break free from the inertia of the past and to restore a capacity for growth that has been stunted for too long. Despite the deep wounds inflicted by this crisis and the lingering effects of the previous ones that have yet to be absorbed, there will be no shortage of opportunities in the future, and Italy has the means to exploit them.Returning to the path of development The pandemic and the recession have opened up extremely uncertain scenarios that make it very difficult to map out what form future equilibriums will take. Uncertainty is another reason to act immediately to strengthen our economy and to press on with that comprehensive package of reforms whose course, for the most part, has already been charted. Only time will reveal the results of our actions, but a comprehensive plan makes the future clearer, shapes expectations, and bolsters confidence; it can draw on a number of strengths that have become apparent in these past difficult years. Thanks to the recovery of our exports’ competitiveness and to the high trade surpluses recorded since 2012, Italy’s net external position has reached substantial equilibrium. The financial conditions of banks and firms are better today than in 2007. Italian households’ net, real and financial wealth is high: 8.1 times disposable income against 7.3 times on average in the euro area. Household debt is low by international standards, and is concentrated among those with a greater debt repayment capacity; at the end of 2019, it was less than 62 per cent of their disposable income, against 95 per cent for the euro area on average (with a peak of over 200 per cent in the Netherlands), 96 per cent in the United States, and 124 per cent in the United Kingdom. At the end of 2019, corporate debt amounted to 68 per cent of GDP, compared with 108 per cent in the euro area and more than 150 per cent in France and the Netherlands. In the private sector as a 
BANCA D’ITALIAThe Governor’s Concluding RemarksAnnual Report 201912whole, debt was equal to 110 per cent of GDP, more than 50 points lower than the euro-area average (Figure 8). These data nevertheless reveal a disconnect between the resources available and the country’s capacity to utilize them to regain the path of sustained and balanced growth, to return Italy as swiftly as possible to levels of well-being not experienced for more than ten years now, and to offer future generations the chance to improve their standards of living, health and general culture.The demographic trends are not favourable: even taking account of the contribution of immigration (estimated by Eurostat to amount to approximately 200,000 persons on average per year), the population aged between 15 and 64 will decline by more than 3 million over the next 15 years. Nevertheless, assuming that the trends of the last ten years continue in a similar vein, higher female labour market participation and the extension of working lives can enable employment to make a positive contribution to growth, of more than half a percentage point per year. To restore GDP growth to around 1.5 per cent (the average annual level recorded in the ten years leading up to the global financial crisis) will require an average increase in labour productivity of a little under 1 percentage point per year (Figure 9). This objective calls for a sharp rise in tangible and intangible capital investment, and for productive efficiency gains comparable to those observed in the other main European countries. In any event, its achievement presupposes a break from the recent past; it calls for the resolution of those structural problems, which for too long now we have failed to address, and which have become increasingly pressing in a new technological context and a more integrated world. Last year, the ratio of investment to GDP was still three percentage points below what it was in 2007: this year it will decline further (Figure 10). The lags with respect to the most advanced economies cannot be recouped by increasing public expenditure without first improving its efficacy and without making structural adjustments to the economy. While it will remain extraordinarily accommodative for a long time, monetary policy is no substitute for the measures needed to raise growth potential. Resources must be channelled to where the social returns are highest; to do so requires ongoing and substantial improvement in public services, with the necessary simplifications and the right distribution and mindful assumption of responsibilities. The technologies used and the quality and motivational levels of human resources have a profound impact on how administrations operate. We have learnt a lot from this crisis; it has demonstrated the need to fast track the digitalization of working processes and to rethink their organization. The heavy turnover expected in public administration in the 
BANCA D’ITALIAThe Governor’s Concluding Remarks13Annual Report 2019coming years will make it possible to hire young, highly-skilled and motivated workers from a variety of backgrounds; we must support and invest in them. The accumulated lag in infrastructure must be overcome, as regards both traditional infrastructure, which must be upgraded and made more efficient, and highly innovative infrastructure, such as the telecommunication networks, which are necessary to support the technological transformation of the Italian economy. The fixed broadband network reaches less than one fourth of households, compared with 60 per cent on average in Europe, and the South of the country is especially penalized. The European Commission ranks Italy nineteenth among the EU states for connectivity. As has been underlined for too many years now, the quality of human capital must be improved, by tackling the underlying problems of schools, universities and the research sector. A better education system generates higher returns; a country that innovates creates better and more widespread job opportunities. The differences in educational outcomes across local territories perpetuate and increase inequalities of income and opportunity. In many cases, school and university buildings fall short on security, comfort and technology, while teacher quality and motivational levels are of vital importance. Households must also be convinced of the importance of investing in knowledge: Italy ranks second last in the European Union on the proportion of young people aged between 25 and 34 with tertiary education; it is ranked first for the share of young people aged between 15 and 29 who neither study nor work. This is a loss of individual opportunities that exposes them to the risk of exclusion and is a waste for society as a whole. Notwithstanding the high degree of efficiency and quality for which research in Italy in renowned, the State invests about €8 billion in its university system, half of what countries similar to Italy invest relative to GDP. Even just the reallocation of a modest portion of the government budget would lead to a marked improvement in youth training and in the ability to produce innovation. This would strengthen Italy’s ability to tap into the European resources allocated to research and would also benefit the productive sector, which invests barely 0.9 per cent of GDP in research, compared with the 1.7 per cent invested on average by OECD countries (Figure 11). The hiring of new researchers, envisaged in the recent decrees, marks a significant break with the past.To stay competitive, businesses must invest in new technology and innovation, open up to sources of external funding and outside professional expertise, and attend to staff training: only by raising productive efficiency and the quality of the goods and services provided can they set their sights 
BANCA D’ITALIAThe Governor’s Concluding RemarksAnnual Report 201914on growth. The available tax incentives are substantial by any measure. The positive results of the allowance for corporate equity (ACE) and Industry 4.0 can be built on, by rationalizing and stabilizing these instruments, and by providing certainty to those willing to take up the innovation challenge. The crisis in the tourist sector has made immediately appreciable the economic importance, and not only, of Italy’s natural and historical-artistic heritage that goes to the heart of this country’s identity. This heritage must be protected and made increasingly easy to access in ways that are safe for tourists, so that after the pandemic it can contribute again to growth, even more so than before. The opportunities that will come from the inevitably faster transition to an economy with lower greenhouse gas emissions and more digital technology must be seized.The public resources needed to finance all these measures and to favour the productive use of private funds must come from a restructuring of the public budget, the recovery of the tax base, a reduction in the risk premium on government bonds, and the pragmatic and judicious use of European funds. Excluding interest payments, Italy’s public expenditure is comparable with the average for the euro area as a whole, even if the share of pension expenditure is higher and is destined to increase further, driven by the ageing population. Tax revenues are also broadly aligned with the average of the other countries, even if the tax wedge on labour is higher. Where Italy differs most from the other advanced economies is in the extent of its underground economy and tax evasion, which translates into an excessive tax burden for those who play by the rules. The resulting injustices and profound distortionary effects dent the economy’s ability to grow and firms’ capacity to innovate; they generate privileges of position that damage the efficiency of the productive system. A comprehensive rethinking of the tax system that also takes account of the changes in the social welfare system must set itself the objective of reducing the tax levy on the factors of production. Policies, reforms and actions that return Italy to the path of sustained, widespread and balanced growth would also help to maintain relaxed conditions on the financial markets, thereby lowering the average cost of the debt and favouring the gradual and necessary rebalancing of the public accounts. The underlying uncertainty that weighs on Government bond yields and makes them so high compared with countries that have similar characteristics, can only be dispelled through economic policy choices that look beyond the short term.The sustainability of the public debt is not in doubt, but its high level relative to GDP is being maintained by the low growth potential of the country and is, at the same time, an obstacle to economic growth. Compared with the average for the rest of the euro area, economic growth in Italy is 
BANCA D’ITALIAThe Governor’s Concluding Remarks15Annual Report 2019lower and the cost of the debt higher; in the last five years as a whole, together with Greece, Italy is the only euro-area country to have recorded a positive and ample gap between the cost of the debt and economic growth. In these circumstances, a primary surplus in the order of 1.5 per cent of GDP, such as the one recorded over the past six years, would be necessary if only to stabilize the ratio of debt to GDP.By contrast, with an economic growth rate of between 1 and 2 per cent and the narrowing of the yield spread between Italian and German government bonds to levels in line with the two countries’ fundamentals, a primary surplus of that size would suffice to reduce the debt burden by around 2 percentage points on average per year. Growth and fiscal policies would reinforce each other, in a virtuous circle that our country is certainly capable of activating. Italy and Europe A return to robust and lasting growth by Italy is also important for the future of the European economy as a whole. Within the EU, Italy is in third place for population size and GDP. Taking account of the intermediate goods traded in Europe’s value chains, Italy’s share of EU exports to other countries stands at 14 per cent. Italy holds almost €300 billion worth of direct investment in the rest of Europe and more than €1,200 billion in portfolio investment. In the last decade, more than 100,000 European citizens have moved to our country each year on average. Italy contributes decisively to making Europe more attractive to tourists and investors. In 2019, there were more than 60 million European visitors to Italy and  35 million from other countries. In the same way, Europe is important for Italy. European Union countries constitute the main outlet market for Italy’s goods, accounting for 50 per cent of our exports. The trade tensions triggered in 2018 by the resurgence of protectionist pressures on the global scene had already underlined the political and economic importance of the European project in navigating an increasingly complex global situation. The pandemic has abruptly intensified the decline in international trade and highlighted the risks connected with an extremely fragmented production system, based on value chains spread across the globe. In the last two decades, there have certainly been significant economic benefits from production being organized on a global scale but even in more recent times, these benefits had started to wane, particularly in the manufacturing sector and partly as a result of the progress in automation. 
BANCA D’ITALIAThe Governor’s Concluding RemarksAnnual Report 201916Trade with the rest of the world accounts for almost 20 per cent of EU GDP.  If globalization continues to regress after the crisis, the growth outlook for European countries will depend more than ever on internal demand within the area and their capacity to act as one. The European Union is an impressive resource for its citizens. The painful experience of the pandemic today strengthens the case for staying together and not just from an economic point of view. This has been clearly proven by the show of solidarity by the highest representatives of the European institutions, by the leaders and by the peoples of the European nations towards the countries most affected by the pandemic. As I mentioned before, the Commission and the European Council acted rapidly to facilitate national interventions in support of households and firms and new financial instruments were created to support countries in difficulty. The European Central Bank acted decisively, promptly and very effectively.The reciprocal fears and prejudices that resurfaced during the two crises of the last decade, and which have also at times weighed on the important decisions to be made in this delicate phase, must be definitively overcome and rejected with the responsible contribution of each one of us. European countries are called on to face the same challenges. The exceptional fall in demand exposes households, firms, and financial institutions in all countries to risks for which there can only be a joint response. The pandemic has revealed the potential benefits of a common health strategy. Similar considerations to those valid for health apply to other essential services as well, such as education, defence, security and justice. Both public and private debt are destined to rise in relation to GDP in all countries. In the longer term, there will be a generalized increase in public spending connected with population ageing. There must also be a joint effort to protect the environment and take full advantage of technological innovation: the amount of investment needed will call for the economies of scale that only a large market such as Europe’s can guarantee. The environment and innovation were and still are central to the European Commission’s vision for the continent’s development. The investment plan proposed in January under the European Green Deal will mobilize at least €1 trillion in sustainable public and private investment over the next ten years. Considerable financial commitments have been made for innovation as well. The proposal presented by the Commission to the European Parliament two days ago for the creation of new instrument called ‘Next Generation EU’, reasserts the centrality of the environmental and digital transitions. These are flanked by the objective of reinforcing cooperation in the field of health. The proposal includes the establishment of a €750 billion fund for grants 
BANCA D’ITALIAThe Governor’s Concluding Remarks17Annual Report 2019and loans to the Member States (€500 billion and €250 billion respectively). The finance raised on the market by the European Commission would be assigned within the multiannual financial framework of the European Union, favouring the countries that have been hardest hit by the crisis. This is an important opportunity to prepare a common response which, alongside the monetary measures, is proportionate to the seriousness of the crisis. In such an integrated area as ours, the difficulties of each country inevitably have repercussions on all the others. Only strong, united and coordinated action will enable us to protect and relaunch productive capacity and employment throughout Europe’s economy. Putting aside any calculations of the financial advantage for each country, the significance of the Commission’s initiative lies in the idea that, in exceptional circumstances, the spending capacity of the EU budget could be increased by borrowing, in order to intervene when and where necessary. The Fund would in fact be financed by the issuance of a common debt instrument by the European Union, which would be the responsibility of all the member countries. Some countries would be net beneficiaries, others net contributors. The role that each country will have to play will depend on its relative needs but also on its capacity to use the resources that will be made available.By participating in defining the current European strategy, Italy is called upon to make an extraordinary effort, both on a technical front and in terms of planning, to make better use of the opportunities offered than it has done in recent decades under EU programmes. By following a path forged together with our partners towards an innovative and more sustainable economy, we would be more likely to return to the path of development. We would contribute to redefining the economic and social model on which the wellbeing of all the peoples of Europe jointly depends, moving in the direction of justice and efficiency.This is the third crisis that the European Union has had to face in little more than ten years. We know very well how difficult it is to manage emergency situations when the institutional framework is incomplete, within which the interventions of individual countries may be constrained by weak conditions and the actions of the European institutions may be limited by a lack of instruments. It is worth repeating that the complex system of legal sources, institutional architecture and competencies must not favour uncertain interpretations of the rules guiding its actions. Some steps – even strides – forward have been taken, but we are still waiting for the qualitative leap described in the reports prepared by the presidents of the main European institutions immediately after the sovereign debt crisis. 
BANCA D’ITALIAThe Governor’s Concluding RemarksAnnual Report 201918The financial system and the action taken by the Bank of ItalyItalian banks find themselves facing the crisis from a stronger position than the one they were in before the double-dip recession of 2008-13. The ratio of the highest loss-absorbing capital to risk-weighted assets rose from 7.1 per cent in 2007 to 13.9 per cent last December. The balance sheets have been cleared of most non-performing loans, which have fallen by two thirds over the last four years (Figure 12). In the first quarter of this year, the banking system’s capital position improved further; a contributory factor was the decision not to distribute dividends, in accordance with the recommendations of the supervisory authorities. No liquidity tensions were recorded and retail deposits continued to grow. So far, the impact of the recession has been apparent in difficulties accessing the bond market, which have been widespread across Europe, and in a moderate increase in loan loss provisions attributable to those banks that have incorporated the unfavourable economic outlook into the models used to compute expected losses. The consequences of the crisis have so far been modest for institutional investors as well. The sharp drop in the prices of financial assets and the rise in their volatility have led to a reduction in the solvency ratio of insurance companies, which nevertheless remains well above the regulatory minimum. The considerable requests for redemptions in the investment funds segment have been met in an orderly fashion, also thanks to the limits on investment in illiquid assets provided for under Italian regulations.Also thanks to the strengthening achieved in recent years, and to the refinancing operations of the ECB, the banking system is now able to support the substantial liquidity needs of households and firms. As a member of the task force established by the Ministry of Economy and Finance charged with overseeing the efficient and rapid roll-out of the support measures for firms, we have issued clarifications and recommendations to intermediaries. In recent weeks, we have also begun to collect targeted data from banks so that we can monitor the extent to which these measures have been implemented. As I recalled earlier, the vast majority of applications for a moratorium have been approved. There have been some frictions in the granting of loans backed by public guarantees. The difficulties leading to delays stem from multiple causes. The volume of applications has been, and continues to be, exceptional; organizational problems and differences between banks’ IT systems may help explain some of the lag times recorded in responses to applications, which have been more marked for smaller banks. The procedures required 
BANCA D’ITALIAThe Governor’s Concluding Remarks19Annual Report 2019to implement the measures are complex and involve numerous actors. The legislature has had to strike a difficult balance between conflicting needs: on the one hand, the need to rapidly channel resources to those seriously affected by the fallout of the epidemic; on the other, to safeguard the State, ensuring that the guarantees do not extend to loans that are at very high risk of default or that are susceptible to criminal use. Furthermore, the legislative framework is new and not yet stable. In the absence of any explicit regulatory provisions, banks that fail to conduct a creditworthiness assessment expose themselves to the risk of committing a crime. Intermediaries are also rightly required to carry out the controls provided for by anti-mafia and anti-money laundering legislation, which safeguard against risks that have increased significantly during the emergency. Several amendments are designed to resolve or mitigate some of these problems; in the testimonies we have given before the Parliamentary committees we have addressed these problems and proposed some possible solutions. I am confident that in the coming weeks, with the cooperation of all those involved, we will see substantial improvements in the flow of resources to the economy.Notwithstanding the progress of the last few years, the depth of the recession will inevitably affect banks’ balance sheets in the medium term. The increase in non-performing loans will have to be dealt with in a timely manner, using all available instruments, including those for their restructuring and sale on the market. Should it prove necessary, we must stand ready to explore solutions to safeguard the system’s stability, considering preventive tools to help banks that are facing severe, even if presumably temporary, difficulties. The fall in productive output could exacerbate the problems of some intermediaries that do not have ample capital reserves, especially small banks with traditional business models. We welcome the recent measures designed to facilitate the management of crisis situations at these intermediaries, and view the resources allocated as a first sign of willingness to intervene. However, we continue to be concerned about the inadequacy of the European bank crisis management framework, about which we have spoken on many occasions.The cooperative banking groups formed just under a year ago are now in a position to face the challenges posed by the recession by reaping the benefits of integration. The ability to raise funds on the capital markets is vital today; any steps backward from what has already been achieved would constitute a grave and costly regression. Close ties to local communities and their mutualistic spirit do not remove the need for strong governance and skilled managers, both in the parent company and in the member cooperative credit banks. Profitability must be sufficient to ensure that they are adequately capitalized, a precondition for the performance of their cooperative role. 
BANCA D’ITALIAThe Governor’s Concluding RemarksAnnual Report 201920In financial intermediation, too, the public health emergency and the containment measures have made the advantages of digital solutions even more tangible. This will inevitably lead to an acceleration of investment in new technologies, which with the achievement of appropriate economies of scale can be made at a lower cost and to greater advantage. These savings, in turn, will make it easier to raise the resources necessary to support investment, including through access to the financial market.There are many areas that could benefit from technological innovation: service distribution, customer creditworthiness assessment and monitoring, and regulatory compliance processes. In the retail payments sector, a traditional incubator of innovation, the opportunities offered by technology can provide real benefits to users of the services. The supply of bank loans to firms through digital channels, which is still very limited in Italy, can now make rapid and substantial progress. The Bank of Italy is active on a number of fronts to address the changes prompted by technological innovation in financial services. We have strengthened dialogue with operators through our innovation hub, our FinTech Channel, and through new procedures to authorize market access; we are collaborating with the Ministry of Economy and Finance in a forum for authorities on digital innovation and participating in the launch of a regulatory sandbox; we support the development of system solutions designed to ensure the proper balance between the need for standardization and competition in innovative sectors, procedures for updating regulations and legal certainty, new investments and risk mitigation.We will soon establish a dedicated unit tasked with proposing and coordinating Fintech initiatives, as well as monitoring retail payment services and instruments. This will allow us to capitalize on the synergies between banknote circulation, electronic payments and digital services, and strengthen our capacity to observe phenomena that could lead to the development of new products in the future. Our efforts remain focused on supporting the development of a broad-based and safe digital economy, providing support for innovative projects promoted by the private sector and ensuring that households, firms and general government derive the maximum benefit. We will promote the nation’s main financial centre, namely Milan, as a digital innovation hub on a European scale. There will also be an office in Milan dedicated to experimentation, to gathering the contributions of Italian and international independent experts and companies, to collaborating with institutions and universities, and to engaging in dialogue with market operators.
BANCA D’ITALIAThe Governor’s Concluding Remarks21Annual Report 2019Advanced data analysis techniques enable us to improve the efficacy of our supervision and control in the areas of anti-money laundering and transparency. The Financial Intelligence Unit for Italy regularly uses them to identify anomalies in financial transactions and to assess, together with the bank’s supervisory arm, the degree of risk of money laundering to which intermediaries are exposed. We are also experimenting new ways of using artificial intelligence to extract specific data from suspicious transaction reports and complaints, with the aim of both identifying phenomena requiring intervention by the FIU and of guiding the work of prudential supervision and consumer protection initiatives. The new Directorate General for Consumer Protection and Financial Education will allow us to focus on improving and making more effective the channels of communication with users of banking and financial services, on strengthening controls on intermediaries’ behaviour, on the drafting of regulations, on reinforcing the Banking and Financial Ombudsman (ABF), and on promoting financial education. The new prudential supervision and supervisory protection organizational framework will strengthen our synergies and collaboration with the other authorities working on the same fronts: Consob in the area of financial services, IVASS as regards insurance products, COVIP for supplementary pension schemes, and the Competition Authority (AGCM) for unfair commercial practices. We continue to cooperate in many areas with the judicial authorities to prevent and combat crime, and to support the efforts of the investigative bodies and the judiciary.Our commitment in the area of financial stability extends to overseeing the markets and the relative infrastructures, especially those that help the government securities market and the payments system function smoothly. We have devoted particular attention to strengthening the financial sector’s cyber resilience, in line with the Government’s national security strategies.Throughout this emergency, we have never failed to ensure the orderly and continuous functioning of the payment and settlement systems that we manage at national and European level. We have continued to provide services to general government and to citizens, including through the online channels that have been gradually set up in recent years.The Bank of Italy’s tasks also still include the crucial one of managing monetary policy. Even at this difficult time, we have contributed to its definition and implementation. Against a backdrop of rising complexity and heightened financial tensions, the frequency and scope of our daily market operations has increased significantly. We have greatly expanded our refinancing of banks, including among eligible loans also those backed by the State guarantees provided for under the recent Government measures. 
BANCA D’ITALIAThe Governor’s Concluding RemarksAnnual Report 201922As happens each year, more detailed information on our operations is provided in our Annual Accounts, published at the end of March, and in the Report on Operations and Activities of the Bank of Italy, available to you here today, along with our Annual Report.*   *   *We are living through the greatest public health and economic crisis in recent history. In Italy, as in many other countries, doctors and nurses have been placed under unprecedented pressure. Thanks to their commitment, in the most difficult of conditions, even more dire consequences have been averted. Our thoughts are with the many among them who have paid the ultimate price, with all the victims of this tragedy and with their families.In Italy as in the rest of the world, the economic policy response was aimed first and foremost at managing the health crisis and at slowing the spread of the virus, including through drastic lockdown measures. Extraordinary budgetary provisions have brought relief to households and firms whose jobs, livelihoods, and income have all been affected. If not curbed by these measures, and by grantedly massive and timely monetary policy interventions, such a profound crisis would have had even more deleterious effects on the productive sector and on society as a whole. However, just as social distancing flattens the curve of contagion without eradicating the virus, so do the support measures help to dilute and mitigate the repercussions of the crisis over time without eliminating its causes.Today uncertainty is rife, not only about the course of the pandemic but also about the repercussions on behavioural patterns, on consumption and on investment decisions. We ask ourselves what new needs will emerge and what social mores will be definitively left behind. And we wonder about the possible consequences beyond the immediate term, for how our society and productive activity is organized. In the coming months, demand will slowly begin to pick up. It will be necessary to avoid imprudent behaviour and to keep our guard up to prevent the infection curve from rising again. The productive system must guarantee safe working conditions and address changes in global value chains; supply will also be recalibrated to satisfy the new needs of customers; and investment plans will be revised. During this transition, employment may fall and workers may remain furloughed; consumption will be held back, also owing to the possible increase in precautionary spending driven by apprehension not only about the economic outlook. Social unrest may grow; the budgetary measures are designed to counter this eventuality.
BANCA D’ITALIAThe Governor’s Concluding Remarks23Annual Report 2019After the pandemic wanes, the world will be a different place. While we may to some extent perceive and combat, with all of our strength, the gravity of the social and economic consequences in the short term, for the longer term effects we can only acknowledge what we know we do not know. It is very difficult to predict what shape these new equilibria will take or what new normal awaits us, if indeed it is possible to speak of such things as equilibria and normalcy. To cope with such uncertainty it is, however, vital that today, more than ever before, we rapidly bridge the gaps and overcome the constraints that have long since been identified. Today, more than ever before, because one thing is certain: after the pandemic there will be much higher levels of public and private debt and greater inequalities, not only of the economic kind. Only by consolidating the foundations from which to start again will it be possible to rise to the challenges that we must face. The devastation wreaked by the pandemic is of a different kind to that experienced during a world war and it is hard to compare the two. We can, however, start from an image of how a great war can be managed. Eighty years ago John Maynard Keynes wrote: ‘…it is recognised that the best security for an early conclusion is a plan for long endurance…a plan conceived in a spirit of social justice, a plan which uses a time of general sacrifice’ – we might well say such as the one being made in this period – ‘not as an excuse for postponing desirable reforms, but as an opportunity for moving further than we have moved hitherto towards reducing inequalities.’It will be vital to put the resources mobilized to good use to overcome the most serious difficulties, to create without delay the conditions for recouping lost ground, to use technological progress to our advantage to return to more balanced and sustainable growth, one that generates employment and also allows us to lower the burden of the public debt, with the right degree of graduality but fearlessly.Let us recall here the strengths of our economy. Notwithstanding the delays and difficulties, especially at regional level, in recent months the network infrastructures have held up, enabling thousands to continue to work remotely. The manufacturing sector is flexible and, since the sovereign debt crisis, has rapidly recovered competitiveness, bringing the balance of payments into surplus. Italy’s net external debt is practically nil. The real and financial wealth of households is high overall and their levels of indebtedness among the lowest in the advanced countries, while those of firms are below the European average. The financial system, stronger now despite the double-dip recession, is in decidedly better shape than it was on the eve of the financial crisis.There are, however, some investments that cannot be avoided, in particular those addressed to innovation in productive activities and 
BANCA D’ITALIAThe Governor’s Concluding RemarksAnnual Report 201924improving the environment, investments which must increasingly be interlinked. A business-friendly context requires resolute, rapid and sweeping interventions to raise the quality and efficiency of public services substantially. And we need to emphasize, if possible even more so today, how important it is to invest in increasing the levels of culture and knowledge, from school to university and to research. A renewed economic environment could bear fruit if all the stakeholders who are part of it − firms and households, students and workers, financial intermediaries and savers − are each able to assume full responsibility for their own role. Yet it is not only a question of economics. While the transformations that the economy, society, politics and culture will undergo are uncertain, there will undoubtedly be interactions and reciprocal influences. We have to recognize and be open to many different points of view, interests and needs. It will be necessary to foster rational debate and constructive dialogue among those with different skills and among those whose responsibilities may differ but who nonetheless are neither distinct nor distant entities. What is needed is a new relationship between the Government, businesses in the real economy and in finance, institutions, and civil society. We can avoid calling it, as has been suggested, a need for a new ‘social contract’, but here too we must move in the direction of rational debate and to breathe life into constructive dialogue.A new kind of relationship is indispensable in Europe as well. Each country must use the resources placed at its disposal by the European institutions pragmatically, transparently and, above all, efficiently. European funds can never be ‘free of charge’: Europe’s debt is everyone’s debt and Italy will always contribute greatly to the funding of European initiatives, because it is the third largest economy in the EU. But joint, strong and coordinated action will protect and contribute to relaunching production capacity and employment throughout the European economy. The importance of the Commission’s recent proposal is not in grants substituting loans, but that there will be collective responsibility for funding the recovery: this would be the first step towards fiscal union and the completion of the European project. Embracing this idea with conviction in order to design it carefully and plan its implementation is a necessity that can no longer be postponed. A united commitment is in the collective interest: the dramatic circumstances of today bolster the reasons for standing together, they drive us to pursue a project that can mobilize resources to support growth that is both inclusive and sustainable. Today we hear the phrase ‘we can get through this’ from many quarters. We say it too, but it must not be merely rhetorical optimism; rather we must 
BANCA D’ITALIAThe Governor’s Concluding Remarks25Annual Report 2019take on a concrete commitment together. We will get through this by making wise and informed choices and by being farsighted. We will get through this, starting from strong points that we sometimes forget, by finally facing the weaknesses that we sometimes don’t want to see. Many people have lost their lives, many are mourning their loved ones, many fear losing their jobs, but no-one must lose hope.

FIGURES

BANCA D’ITALIAThe Governor’s Concluding Remarks29Annual Report 2019Figure 1GDP growth forecasts(per cent)-8-6-4-202468-8-6-4-202468      2020      2021      2020      2021      2020      2021WorldAdvanced economiesEmerging economiesJan. 2020forecastApr. 2020forecastSource: IMF. Figure 2Balance sheets of the main central banks: total assets(per cent of GDP)02040608010012001020304050602007200920112013201520172019Federal ReserveBankof EnglandEurosystemBankof Japan (right-hand scale)Sources: Based on data from central banks and national statistics offices.Note: Total assets, not including gold, as a percentage of GDP in 2019. Data at 22 May 2020.
BANCA D’ITALIAThe Governor’s Concluding RemarksAnnual Report 201930Figure 3Inflation expectations in the euro area(per cent)-1-0.500.511.52-1-0.500.511.5220172018201920201-year10-yearSource: Bloomberg.Note: Inflation swap rates. Data at 26 May 2020.Figure 4Sovereign spreads(basis points)010020030040001002003004002017201820192020ItalyPortugalSpainFranceSource: Based on Bloomberg data.Note: Yield spreads between the ten-year government bonds and the corresponding German Bund. Data at 26 May 2020.
BANCA D’ITALIAThe Governor’s Concluding Remarks31Annual Report 2019Figure 5Discretionary budgetary measures in response to the epidemic(per cent of GDP)012345012345GermanyFranceItalyNetherlandsSpainEuro areaSources: The European Commission for the euro area and the Netherlands; national Stability Programmes for Germany, France, Italy and Spain (April 2020).Note: Increase in general government net borrowing in 2020 following the measures adopted in response to the epidemic.Figure 6Growth in bank lending to firms in Italy (12-month percentage change)-6-4-2024-6-4-202420132014201520162017201820192020Source: Supervisory reports.Note: Updated to April 2020.
BANCA D’ITALIAThe Governor’s Concluding RemarksAnnual Report 201932Figure 7Level of GDP in Italy: scenario analysis(2006=100)808590951001058085909510010520062008201020122014201620182020Adverse scenarioBaseline scenarioSources: Based on Istat data. For the scenarios for 2020-21, Banca d’Italia, Note Covid-19, 15 May 2020.Figure 8Public and private debt(per cent of GDP)050100150200250300050100150200250300ITFRDENLESEuroareaITFRDENLESEuroareaPublicPrivateSources: Based on data from Banca d’Italia, ECB, European Commission, Eurostat and Istat.Note: End-2019 data. Private debt: households’ and firms’ financial debt.
BANCA D’ITALIAThe Governor’s Concluding Remarks33Annual Report 2019Figure 9Long-term scenario for GDP and labour productivity in Italy(1980=100)8010012014016018080100120140160180198019902000201020202030Labour productivityGDPSource: Based on Istat data.Note: Assessment horizon of the long-term scenario: 2020-35.Figure 10Long-term scenario for investment in Italy(1980=100)15171921232580100120140160180198019902000201020202030Investment-to-GDP ratio (right-hand scale)Investment%Source: Based on Istat data.Note: Assessment horizon of the long-term scenario: 2020-35.
BANCA D’ITALIAThe Governor’s Concluding RemarksAnnual Report 201934Figure 12Italian banks’ capital and NPLs(per cent of risk-weighted assets and billions of euros)05010015020025068101214162007200920112013201520172019NPLs (right-hand scale)Highest loss-absorbing capitalSources: Supervisory reports (consolidated for banking groups and individual for stand-alone banks).Note: End-of-period data; highest loss-absorbing capital: Core Tier 1 to 2013 and Common Equity Tier 1 subsequently; total NPLs net of loan loss provisions.Figure 11Spending on research and development(per cent of GDP)01230123ItalyFranceGermanySpainJapanUnitedKingdomUnitedStatesOECDcountriesPrivatePublicSource: Based on OECD data, Main Science and Technology Indicators, 2019/2.Note: 2018 data.

Printed by the Printing and Publishing Division  of the Bank of ItalyRome, 29 May 2020Printed on EU-Ecolabel certified paper  (registration number FI/011/001)
            I would like to thank Megan Bell, Fred Schneider, Alan Sheppard, Manuel Sales, Lewis Webber, Santosh Pandit, Stefan Claus, Paola Vega and Patrick Cleary for their help in preparing these remarks.     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 1      “Life beyond Solvency II: A view from the top of the regulator”  Speech given by Charlotte Gerken, Executive Director of Insurance Supervision  Remarks delivered at the Association of British Insurers (ABI) Prudential Regulation webinar keynote address 19 May 2020   
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 2  2   Good afternoon.  Many thanks to the ABI for inviting me to speak at this prudential regulation webinar.  When I was asked to give a view from the top of the regulator, I can’t say I’d been expecting to give that view from south west London.    Thinking about the theme of today’s webinar, ‘Life beyond Solvency II’, the scope of my talk is two-fold: Firstly to reflect on what we have learned about Solvency II during a first test of the regime, to inform how our regulatory framework may develop following the end of the EU withdrawal implementation period.  And secondly beyond the Solvency II regulatory regime, what some of our key supervisory priorities are.  As a result of the challenges presented by Covid-19, we – like you – had to shift resource from our longer term business priorities – including supervision and policy reform – to short-term crisis management.  It’s therefore worth taking some time to think about what we as the prudential regulator and the insurance industry have already learnt from the current crisis –including how the Solvency II regime has responded.    None of us knows how the full effects of the coronavirus pandemic will unfold.  Our aim at the Bank, alongside colleagues at the FCA and within government, is to build a bridge across the economic disruption created by the pandemic and help UK businesses, consumers and the financial sector to the other side.  Insurers will need to be on the front foot in identifying the potential impacts on their longer-term business models in order to meet changing customer expectations.  Covid-19: what role has Solvency II played in the industry’s response?  I have talked previously about the principles of Solvency II that the PRA supports - a whole balance sheet, market consistent approach to regulatory solvency, and focus on good governance and risk management1.   The adequacy of firms’ capital and risk management during this global, systemic event is certainly being tested.  The information we have from the largest UK insurers shows the industry was well-capitalised going into this crisis and has so far remained so, with aggregate solvency ratios around 150%2. But given the exceptional uncertainty generated by the current crisis, we expect insurers to increase their monitoring of the additional risks presented by Covid‐19, and where necessary to update their risk and capital assessments accordingly.   A key challenge of the Covid-19 crisis for us has been isolating the signal – the increased risk to insurers and their policyholders – from the noise caused by markets finding their way with very sharp but temporary overreactions.                                                       1 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/speech/2019/insurance-risk-management-in-a-changing-world-speech-by-charlotte-gerken 2 Category 1 & 2 life and non-life insurers regulated by the PRA 
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 3  3   Solvency II contains several measures that were intended to or have otherwise leant against the pitching and rolling of financial markets.  These include the Matching Adjustment (MA) and the transitional measure on technical provisions (TMTP); also the Standard Formula Symmetric Adjustment of the Equity Capital Charge (the symmetric adjustment), the Volatility Adjustment (VA), and the Ladder of Intervention.  In addition to benefiting financial stability, these measures have helped to filter out the noise in financial markets, supporting the PRA in assessing that insurers are adequately capitalised for fundamental risks in their business and protecting policyholders.  The MA is, for UK life insurers, the most material Solvency II long-term guarantees measure, and has been the most significant in the current crisis.  The MA is intended to enable insurers to hold assets to maturity and avoid changes in spread from impacting their solvency.  When appropriately cash-flow matched, their locked-in funding means that annuity writers are unlikely to have to sell assets prior to maturity, even in a severe stress.  In the current crisis, the MA has worked as expected and has shielded insurers from the market dislocations that occurred in March of this year.  As spreads have increased, annuity writers have not had to recognize the full impact on their capital requirements and have been able to discount their liabilities at a higher rate.  In Chart 1, you can see both corporate spreads and the resulting MA.  As spreads widened in mid-March, as you can see, the MA from this portfolio would have tracked it closely, absorbing much of the impact on insurers’ balance sheets.  Importantly, however, this analysis assumes that the underlying assets have not been downgraded.  If and when downgrades increase, the MA will reduce. The point of MA is to separate the noise from the signal, the signal being represented by an asset’s rating: if the rating is unchanged, then changes in spreads are identified as noise and absorbed by the MA.  If assets are downgraded, then the decrease in rating is reflective of increased risk borne by insurers, and which we expect to be appropriately capitalized.  As the effects of Covid-19 have developed, we have been working to provide further guidance to insurers in cases where Solvency II could be unhelpfully misinterpreted, in order to avoid unintended consequences.  For instance, the recent follow-up to insurers on the letter3 from Sam Woods to clarify the PRA’s position on the treatment of covenant breaches and insurers’ internal ratings during Covid-19.   Another supervisory action was taken in relation to the TMTP.  Early in the crisis, the PRA recognised that the significant change in the operating environment as a result of Covid-19, would cause some firms to experience a material change in risk profile.  The UK market is particularly exposed to low interest rates which result in large increases in the risk margin for annuities.  Recognising this, as well as the risks posed by the advent of Covid-19, the PRA invited firms to apply to recalculate their TMTP in light of significant changes in interest rates that occurred in March 2020.  In any application for permission to recalculate                                                       3 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/letter/2020/letter-from-sam-woods-to-insurers-on-distribution-of-profits 
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 4  4   TMTP, the PRA expects firms to be able to demonstrate how the current environment has caused a material change in their own individual risk profile.  The symmetric adjustment is explicitly aimed at mitigating undue pro-cyclical effects as a result of temporary movements in financial markets.  It increases capital requirements when markets are buoyant relative to their historical average and reduces them when markets are relatively depressed.  The chart plots the symmetric adjustment over time.  As you can see from Chart 2, the symmetric adjustment was trending upward, while conditions were relatively benign and markets were rising.  When the Covid-19 outbreak began, it decreased sharply.  In this way, it led to insurers building capital buffers when markets were rising, and then allowed them to be released when markets fell.  The VA is another explicitly countercyclical element of Solvency II that aims to mitigate the effect of exaggerations of bond spreads.  Chart 3 shows the UK VA plotted against UK corporate bond spreads.  From the end of 2019, the VA more than tripled to its peak of 50 basis points in March, coinciding with a rapid rise in credit spreads.  As you can see, though, the increase in the VA, while large relative to its historical level, isn’t as large as the increase in corporate bond spreads.  As spreads have moderated in the last few weeks the VA has also declined, though it still remains elevated by historical standards.  As a result, while the VA provided some cushion against the rise in spreads, a significant amount of the market stress would have been passed through to insurers’ balance sheets.  The final Solvency II measure that I would mention is the ladder of intervention, a tool we have yet to deploy in this crisis.  This allows an insurer that fails to meet its SCR some time to work with the regulator to find a solution to restore their compliance with the SCR.  We therefore see this as an additional tool to promote the safety and soundness of UK insurers and to protect policyholders by avoiding a “cliff-edge” effect of a winding-up.  Life beyond Solvency II: some lessons learned from Covid-19  We will learn from the EIOPA 2020 review post Solvency II implementation.  We will also learn a lot from this crisis.  These lessons are helpful when it comes to thinking about the future UK regulatory landscape.  For example, some early observations.  Solvency II was written to facilitate insurance business by eliminating significant differences between Member States’ regimes and thus aims for uniform rather than dynamic application.  We could think about measures that would improve the PRA’s ability to supervise firms through a cycle.   An alternative could have been for firms to hold additional regulatory capital during more benign times, buffers which the PRA could then allow to be released during a market down-turn.   
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 5  5   This would be similar to the effect of the symmetric adjustment.  At present, buffers held in excess of the solvency capital requirement (SCR) are determined by each insurer’s risk appetite to avoid breaching the SCR, and are thus less likely to be used in a stress.  In relation to internal models, we could review the balance between assessment against tests and standards and supervisory judgements concerning calibration of the overall capital requirement.  Ultimately, the extent to which the UK’s regulatory framework is similar to or different from EU regulation after the implementation period is a political choice.  But as Solvency II is based on the same principles as the preceding UK regime, revolution is less likely than evolution.  And the pace of policy reform – in the UK, but also in the EU and globally through the International Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS) – is likely to be on a longer timetable due to Covid-19 being a shared and pressing priority.   We recognise that there are certain aspects of the design and implementation of the Solvency II regime that do not fit so well to UK specificities. Our views on these areas are well known, and I believe shared by industry.   We understand that the first priority for the industry is the Risk Margin.   The current design is too sensitive to long term interest rates and this has the unintended and perverse consequence of driving a high proportion of longevity risk on new business offshore.  We are committed to reform of the risk margin.  The timing and nature of reform depend, like many questions of regulatory reform, on the final relationship between the UK and the EU.  There is a wide range of options that could be pursued and it is encouraging that EIOPA intends to look at the design of the risk margin in the final stages of the 2020 review.  Second is the matching adjustment.   The PRA supports the concept of the matching adjustment.  It provides the right incentives for insurers to invest in assets that are suitable for their business models.  This in turn also reinforces a macroeconomic role of insurers, who provide stable, long-term investment.  However, we recognise that there are prudential risks and complexity within the matching adjustment that could be reduced.  Some of these arise from the mechanics of the MA.  When the MA – which is designed and calibrated with liquid, traded assets with fixed cash-flows in mind – is applied to assets that are illiquid or have some risks to fixity of cash-flows, then assessing its suitability becomes a much greater challenge.  
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 6  6   The size of the MA benefit that a firm can take on its liabilities is driven by the credit rating assigned to its assets.  This rating may be assessed by an external rating agency or the insurer itself – and the difficulty in modelling the behaviour of long-dated, illiquid assets creates some prudential risk.  If an asset is too highly rated, a firm may be holding insufficient reserves to meet the risk of default or downgrade. Other risks arise from the type of investment that the MA’s strict eligibility criteria incentivise – such as securitised credit which can lack transparency.    While the MA is a valuable part of the solvency framework, we are looking to reduce the complexity and operational burden on firms – and ourselves.  Third, reporting requirements.  The PRA is ready to consider certain short-term suspensions in some aspects of reporting, including the expansion of quarterly reporting waivers and some group reporting.  Short-term suspensions could include removing quarterly reporting requirements for more firms or extending the use of annual reporting waivers. These are changes that we could make relatively quickly and with a high-degree of confidence, rather than a wholesale reinvention.  Any longer term changes or ‘rationalisation’ of the reporting package will need proper consideration in close conjunction with industry.  The Bank’s central Data Team will also consider data collection mechanisms –  the ‘how’, as well as the ‘what’ when it comes to collecting data.   The changes that we implemented in March to allow delays to various aspects of Solvency II and PRA-owned reporting were designed to reduce some of the operational pressure on firms due to Covid-19.   Firms have told us that these flexibilities have been helpful.  Any further reduction in reporting requirements will need to balance efficiency for firms, whilst still enabling us to collect the data we need to effectively supervise the industry.  These areas for reform have been raised by industry on numerous occasions.  It should not come as a surprise however that there are fundamental principles of the regime that we would seek to maintain. As I’ve said before, the principles of Solvency II – a whole balance sheet, market consistent approach to regulatory solvency, focus on good governance and risk management – remain valid.  Looking forward: emerging supervisory priorities  Beyond Solvency II, the Insurance Supervision Directorate has a number of supervisory priorities that we are pursuing through firm supervisory programmes and cross-firm reviews.  
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 7  7   Some of these are on a slower track due to our work with insurers in response to Covid-19.  Others have been brought into sharp relief by the crisis.  I’ll focus on three.  UK life insurers have been incentivised to invest in long-term, illiquid assets with higher yields for some time, given the low interest rate environment.  As a result exposure to credit and other risks (e.g. property) has been increasing. This is further exacerbated by Covid-19 as wider economic disruption has impacted the underlying creditworthiness of some of these assets.  The PRA has published several – one might say many - supervisory statements setting out how we expect firms to manage risks arising from such investment strategies.  We’ve clarified how we expect firms to apply and model the matching adjustment4; taken a deep dive into liquidity risk5; and provided additional guidance on the practical implementation of the Prudent Person Principle6, which is the part of Solvency II that deals with qualitative aspects of investment risk management.  We will be publishing some further, important clarifications on the Prudent Person Principle at the end of this month.  We expect firms to demonstrate that they have strong governance and internal investment limits that are effectively implemented; this remains one of our top priorities for supervision of the life insurance sector. Operational resilience – a strategic priority for the PRA and the Bank as a whole - has been tested in a way few business continuity plans could forsee, as Covid-19 has affected all our operations, processes and people.  The insurance industry – all the people who work in it - responded extremely well to the operational challenges that have arisen from the Covid-19 pandemic.  There are, of course, still challenges for all of us as we move from immediate crisis management to medium term sustainability.  This includes reassessing the impact on cyber and other IT-related risks, whilst at the same time recognising the need for technology-driven solutions to support certain activities.   There are a number of lessons that can be learnt on operational resilience from the Lockdown Phase:   Disaster recovery plans involving redundant office spaces simply did not work. This particularly affected the call centres and other functions that were not set up to work from a non-office environment.  There were shortages in the supply of technology built to corporate security standards to support working from home on a much larger scale than firms had generally envisaged in existing business continuity plans.                                                       4 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2018/solvency-2-matching-adjustment-ss 5 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2019/liquidity-risk-management-for-insurers 6 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2019/solvency-ii-prudent-person-principle 
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 8  8    Firms did not uniformly have sufficient visibility of the operational and financial resilience of some of their key outsourcing service providers.  Finally, cyber criminals’ activity continued throughout the lockdown, whereas firms’ IT and cyber risk management staff had to adapt to the new way of working. Two principal methods used by criminals, phishing emails and malware, continue to rise. Many authorities have highlighted an increase in cyber risk7.  We encourage firms to consider these risks carefully when starting to think about the transition out of the lockdown phase.  The last priority I’ll touch on today is climate change.  Addressing the financial risks from climate change is one of the Bank’s strategic priorities and last year we published expectations for firms to manage the financial risks from climate change8, which included expectations around governance, risk management, scenario analysis and disclosure.   As well as having a named Senior Manager responsible for climate risks, Boards collectively need to understand the impact of climate change on their firm’s business strategy.   Scenario analysis is a key tool that firms can use as part of their assessments of the impact of climate risks on their balance sheet and broader business strategy.  It helps report relevant management information that will enable firm’s boards to discuss, challenge and take decisions relating to the firm’s management of the financial risks from climate change.   Last year – for the first time – we included an exploratory climate stress test as part of the overall insurance stress test exercise.  In light of the pressures on firms and your and our need to focus on Covid-19 specific stresses we decided to pause the work we needed to do with firms to ensure the results were sufficiently robust to publish.  We did learn some lessons from the work we had done that will be useful in our preparation for the climate focussed scenario:     1. Many firms struggled to identify and allocate their investments to sectors identified as having different levels of vulnerability to climate change. 2. Current model designs constrain scenario outcomes – for example, natural catastrophe models often implicitly make allowance for flood defences making it difficult to reflect and assess tipping points as temperature changes become increasingly extreme.                                                       7 NCSC: https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/news/covid-19-exploited-by-cyber-actors-advisory  8 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2019/enhancing-banks-and-insurers-approaches-to-managing-the-financial-risks-from-climate-change-ss 
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 9  9   3. Climate risk management is not yet embedded – for example, for many firms the responses to a questionnaire on adherence to our Climate Supervisory Statement (3/19) suggested greater progress than that indicated in the completion of the stress test.  Earlier this month the PRA announced that the launch of the Climate Biennial Exploratory Scenario will be postponed until at least mid-20219. This delay reflects a desire to maintain the ambitious scope of the exercise, and give firms enough time to invest sufficiently in their capabilities to allow them to deliver to a high standard.    Conclusions  A core objective of supervision is to ensure that firms are resilient throughout the economic cycle. We are currently managing through disruption of a significant scale, and the current crisis may exacerbate business model challenges that insurers will need to confront over the medium and long term.  This pandemic is likely to raise questions for customers around the value provided by insurance products;  we are already seeing significant coverage questions being raised around business interruption and travel policies in particular.   There is a critical role for insurers to adapt and ensure they are able to meet customers’ insurance needs whilst managing their commercial operations, particularly during the transition out of the crisis and into the longer term. Firms should take early steps to assess what changing customer behaviours or expectations could mean for their current business models.  Although it’s difficult to see beyond the immediate crisis, this pandemic is reinforcing two important things.  There are a number of measures contained in Solvency II that have effectively mitigated the pro-cyclical effects caused by the disruption to financial markets.  And second, the importance of the fundamental principles of the regime during a systemic event – those that require prudent capital and risk management.  These can be expected to endure in any future version of our regulatory regime and will be critical for insurers to successfully navigate the complex landscape of emerging risks.                                                            9 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2020/pra-statement-on-prioritisation-covid19 
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 10  10   Appendix  Chart 1: Corporate spreads and the matching adjustment  Source: BOE calculations using Bank of America Merrill Lynch corporate spreads data, EIOPA technical information  Chart 2: Symmetric Adjustment of the Equity Capital Charge  Source: EIOPA “Symmetric adjustment of the equity capital charge April 2020”. Retrieved from https://www.eiopa.europa.eu/tools-and-data/symmetric-adjustment-equity-capital-charge_en  
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 11  11   Chart 3: UK volatility adjustment  Source: BOE calculations using Bank of America Merrill Lynch corporate spreads data, EIOPA technical information   
François Villeroy de Galhau: Presentation of the 2019 AnnualReport of the ACPRSpeech by Mr François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of theAutorité de contrôle prudentiel et de resolution (ACPR), at the press conference, Paris, 28 May2020.*   *   *Ladies and Gentlemen,I am pleased to welcome you to this presentation of the 2019 Annual Report of the Autorité decontrôle prudentiel et de résolution (ACPR – Prudential Supervision and Resolution Authority), inthe company of Bernard Delas, Vice-Chairman of the ACPR, Dominique Laboureix, the newSecretary General of the ACPR, and Alain Ménéménis, the new President of the SanctionsCommittee. The circumstances are unusual and unprecedented. Indeed, we shall be talkingabout a year that has ended, at a time when, since then, we have found ourselves engulfed in anunprecedented health and economic crisis. We shall come back to this.In 2019 and since the start of 2020, the women and men of the ACPR have continued to worktirelessly to safeguard financial stability. I would like to take this opportunity to thank them. Thismorning, I shall focus my comments on an issue that cannot be ignored and that is at the heartof our concerns, without forgetting the other challenges we face – the profitability and solvency ofFrench and European banks and insurers.I. The French financial sector entered the crisis in a solid financial position...French banks have continued to strengthen their financial structure and are today betterplaced to withstand the economic downturn than they were before the 2008 financial crisis.At the end of 2019, they had a strong liquidity position: the liquidity coverage ratio (LCR) of thesix largest French banking groups stood at 131.8%. This means that they had a comfortablesurplus of average liquid assets to fund their potential net outflows in a situation of stress.They have also significantly reinforced their solvency, thanks notably to the Basel III regulations:these have frequently drawn criticism, but today we can all appreciate how useful they havebeen. Common Equity Tier 1 ratios (CET1) have increased by nearly 9 percentage points in thespace of 12 years, from 5.8% in 2008 to 14.4% in 2019, with a rise of half a percentage point in2019 alone. However, profitability levels in the industry remained relatively low in 2019, with theaverage ROE coming out at 6.5%. I highlighted this last year as a point we needed to watch, andit is weighing on the stock market valuations of European banks. The central bank takes this intoaccount in its decisions, in order to guarantee the effective transmission of monetary policy. Thecollective image that we still have from banks must evolve: compared with US banks inparticular, the European banking industry’s profitability is neither excessive nor invulnerable. Toensure they can durably provide their essential services to the economy, French banks need togenerate sufficient revenues, without being subjected from different sides to ever-increasingconstraints.With regard to insurance, the industry has entered the current crisis in a strengthened position. Ina period marked by renewed interest rate cuts, insurers’ solvency capital requirement coverageratio stood at 265% at end-2019, up from 239% at end-2018.But I shall let Bernard Delas go into more detail on that subject.In parallel, financial institutions have had to adapt their business models to two long- 1 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
term challenges:Low rates, which are now likely to be with us for the long haul, place pressure on banks’ andinsurers’ profitability. In this context, banks are being aided by the tiering mechanism introducedby the ECB in September 2019, and insurers by the inclusion of part of their provision for profit-sharing, which boosted their solvency ratios by an average of around 30 percentage points atend-2019.Digitalisation is allowing other economic players, including the Big Techs, to offer activities thatwere traditionally the preserve of the banks. The competition is welcome, but it needs to be fair.The ACPR is continuing to ensure that the regulatory and operational frameworks fosterinnovation while at the same time controlling the associated risks, notably cyber risks, whichhave increased markedly, and the challenges for European sovereignty.II. In the face of this exceptional health crisis, financial institutions and supervisors alikeare responding rapidly and powerfully2.1 Rapid, powerful and unprecedented responses to support the real economy duringthe pandemicUnlike in 2008, banks are at the heart of the solutions this time round, and not at the centre of thecrisis. With their staff, whom I would like to commend, they have gathered their forces to put inplace strong measures to support the real economy. That includes the rapid implementation ofstate-guaranteed loans: to date, 559,000 requests have been received for a total of EUR 105billion, of which EUR 85 billion have already been granted. In France, loans have therefore beenrapidly channelled to VSEs and SMEs, in contrast with the difficulties seen in Italy, the UnitedKingdom and the United States. Bernard Delas will come back to the measures taken byinsurers, but let me just highlight the ACPR’s work on the conditions for the payment ofcompensation for loss of earnings, in order to better identify the challenges faced by the industry.2.2 A responsive monetary policySince this morning we have been in the silent period, so I shall limit myself to some retrospectiveremarks on monetary policy. I have often stressed that monetary policy is not made for thebanks, but rather for the entire economy. And the banks have often been overly critical ofmonetary policy, holding it responsible for all their ills. I therefore think it is all the more importantto stress that the ECB’s recent decisions, in the face of the crisis, have aimed to preserve theeffective transmission of monetary policy via the bank channel:the conditions for TLTRO-IIIs, these targeted longer-term refinancing operations, havebeen significantly eased (up to 50 percentage points lower than the deposit facility rate ifthe target for lending during the “Covid period” is reached, or currently –1%). This radicalinnovation represents a reduction of several billion euros in annual costs for the Europeanbanking system. New operations have also been announced (bridge LTROs, PELTROs or PandemicEmergency Longer-Term Refinancing Operations). Since the implementation of thesemeasures, the outstanding amount of refinancing provided by the Eurosystem to euroarea banks has increased sharply, to more than EUR 1,000 billion, even before the JuneTLTRO.The easing of the collateral framework, for its part, has significantly increased the amountof assets eligible for operations, and supported the supply of credit to the private sector.First, by expanding the use of credit claims (bank loans) as collateral. But also bytemporarily lowering the haircut applied to collateral by 20 percentage points for all assets(and by an additional 20 percentage points for credit claims), or by increasing from 2.5%to 10% the maximum share of unsecured bank debt securities in a credit institution’s 2 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
collateral pool. The imminent entry into force of the regime allowing state-guaranteedloans to be accepted as collateral will give banks even greater access to Eurosystemfinancing.2.3 Adaptation of prudential policyThe ECB, ACPR and banking supervision bodies (the European Banking Authority, the BaselCommittee, etc.) have also decided to take account of the impact of the crisis by makingintelligent use of the flexibilities that they have as supervisors in the implementation of theregulations: we have reduced certain capital requirements and called on banks to reduce theirprecautionary reserves. We sometimes hear the suggestion that this is an unjustified relaxation:it is precisely the opposite. It is for this sort of exceptional circumstance that the reserves ofcapital and liquidity were built up. This is indeed in the spirit of the regulation that they should beused now, in a countercyclical way. This equates to a temporary reduction in the minimumcapital requirement of about 3 percentage points for French banks. We have also temporarilyreduced certain workloads by postponing stress-tests and easing certain reporting conditions.In addition, the European Commission recently proposed a series of targeted revisions to theCRR, to provide a regulatory response to the crisis on top of the flexibilities granted to thesupervisor. While preserving the resilience of the banks, there is a need to make someadjustments to the prudential framework, to limit some procyclical effects of the current crisis onthe level of capital requirements. The proposed measures are a step in the right direction,although we would like, in line with the recent US decisions, to exclude state-guaranteed loansfrom the leverage ratio. Together, they will enable banks to continue playing their full role infinancing the economy, which is a prerequisite for a rapid economic recovery.The preliminary assessment published by the EBA this week needs, of course, to be interpretedwith caution. But it expects that the majority of European banks have sufficient capital buffers toabsorb the severe shock of the Covid-19 crisis. The EBA estimates the impact at between 230and 380 basis points of CET1 capital. And with the aforementioned prudential easing measures,the banks have additional leeway.However, the earnings figures for the first quarter of 2020 already bear the scars of the economicdifficulties and the shock to the financial markets. The earnings reports for the four main Frenchbanking groups (BNP Paribas, Société Générale, Groupe Crédit Agricole and Groupe BPCE)showed a decline of 4.8% in net banking income and a rise of 130% in the cost of risk, and,consequently, a drop of nearly 50% in net earnings compared with the first quarter of 2019. As aresult, financial entities and institutions need to be actively monitored, to ensure that they remainsufficiently financially sound. The ACPR, alongside the Single Supervisory Mechanism, isremaining extremely vigilant in all its areas of competence, including with regard to the protectionof customers and climate-related risks. In the face of this crisis, it is more important than everthat we have a competent supervisor and a resilient financial system. 3 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
Benjamin E Diokno: The new economy - redefining resilienceamidst a pandemicRemarks by Mr Benjamin E Diokno, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the centralbank of the Philippines), at the Virtual Roadshow on the Economic Recovery Program, 28 May2020.*   *   *Good afternoon, everyone.It is my pleasure to meet with you all virtually to discuss with you the macroeconomic outlook andoutline the government’s policy responses to the global health crisis.In this presentation, I will give a brief overview of the country’s macroeconomic fundamentalsgoing into the crisis, and move on to the policy actions pursued by the BSP, in support of thegovernment’s overall strategy, to mitigate the impact of COVID- 19 pandemic on the domesticeconomy. I will also provide you with the measures and reform initiatives that the BSP intends topursue under post-lockdown conditions.The country entered this crisis equipped with strong macroeconomic fundamentals. Last year,real GDP grew by 6.0 percent, continuing the record of over 20 years of uninterrupted broad-based growth. Headline inflation eased to 2.5 percent and was within the government’s targetrange in 2019.We have maintained a robust external payments position, with a surplus in the balance ofpayments (BOP), record-high international reserves, and external debt to GDP ratio.At the same time, the Philippine banking system remained sound and stable. Banks wereadequately capitalized and the quality of their loans and assets were maintained. These providessufficient cushions going into the crisis.These sound fundamentals have put the Philippines on a favorable footing relative to its peers.Earlier this month, the prestigious publication, The Economist surveyed 66 emerging economiesand concluded that the Philippines is the 6th most robust country when the health crisis started,as characterized by ample level of foreign exchange reserves and relatively lower debt-to-GDPratios.The health crisis has considerably altered our near-term growth narrative. In the first quarter of2020, real GDP declined by 0.2 percent with full-year GDP projected to contract between 2.0 to3.4 percent.Meanwhile, latest baseline forecasts indicate that inflation could settle at the low end of thegovernment’s target range of 2.0 percent to 4.0 percent. We expect inflation to average 2.0percent for 2020 due to the decline in global crude oil and non- oil prices and the impact ofCOVID-19 on global and domestic growth prospects.To mitigate the impact of the pandemic and ensure economic recovery post-COVID, the NG laidout its 4-pillar socioeconomic strategy. The BSP’s contributions to the overall stabilization effortsfall under the third pillar. We expect that the economy will recover more strongly once fiscal andmonetary stimulus gain traction and workers and firms resume operations.On the part of the BSP, our focus is ensuring that we pursue all necessary monetary actionsunder the third pillar to ensure that we are able to deliver on our mandate of promoting price andfinancial stability. 1 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
Cognizant of this, we have been decidedly proactive in pursuing policy measures to supportcredit activity and domestic demand as well as ensure the continuous and smooth functioning ofdomestic financial markets by easing monetary policy settings and providing liquidity to thefinancial system as well as relaxing regulatory rules.Consistent with a manageable inflation outlook and well-anchored inflation expectations, theMonetary Board undertook an assertive policy response through a reduction in the overnightpolicy interest rate by a cumulative 125 basis points to cushion the country’s growth momentumand uplift market confidence amid stronger headwinds.The BSP has likewise provided liquidity boost to the financial system by reducing the reserverequirement ratio (RRR), suspending the term deposit facility auctions for certain tenors,ensuring availability of the overnight lending facility (OLF) to counterparties to cover temporaryday-to-day liquidity needs, and scaling down of RRP operations to help provide sufficient liquidityin the interbank loan and government securities markets.Meanwhile, global uncertainties owing to the COVID-19 outbreak heightened risk aversion in BSPsupervised financial institutions (BSFIs).To encourage them to continue their intermediation activities, the Monetary Board approved thegranting of temporary regulatory and rediscounting relief measures to these institutions.These measures include relaxation of BSP regulations such as the single borrower’s limit,penalty for reserve deficiencies, compliance period with BSP supervisory requirements, andknow your customer (KYC) requirements to facilitate access to financial services. Meanwhile,prudential accounting relief measures were also implemented to reduce the impact of Mark- to-Market (MTM) losses on the financial condition of supervised financial institutions.In addition, the BSP has implemented extraordinary liquidity measures to complement theNational Government’s programs in mitigating the impact of COVID-19.These measures include:(a) ₱300 billion repurchase agreement with the Bureau of the Treasury, and(b) launching of a package of measures to support more lending to micro-, small-, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs), such as allowing banks to include new MSME loans as part of theircompliance with the required reserve ratio; temporarily reducing credit risk weight of MSME loansthat are current in status; and assigning zero weight to MSME loans with government guarantee.All these measures show the BSP’s unwavering commitment and readiness to deploy its fullrange of instruments to provide liquidity and ensure an efficient financial system.But we know that we are not far enough yet with this fight. The uncertainty surrounding theresolution of the pandemic remains quite high and even the long-term growth path may alsochange in the post-pandemic world.What else can the BSP do as the economy reopens? Since operational capacity remainsconstrained even under the general community quarantine phase, the liquidity support andregulatory relief measures will remain, subject to the general conditions of the economy and thefinancial sector.In calibrating future monetary policy stance, the BSP will continue to be guided by the inflationoutlook over the policy horizon and the risks surrounding such outlook, as well as data ondemand conditions.At the same time, when domestic developments warrant a scale-down of policy support as 2 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
economic recovery gains traction, the BSP will ensure a smooth transition in winding down itstime/state-bound measures. Exit strategy essentially entailsreversion to policies that are consistent with long-run economic growth path. Nonetheless, wenote that the winding down of support policies and regulatory measures too early or too late maybe harmful and may significantly dampen economic recovery. With this in mind, we will remaindata-dependent in our assessment of monetary and economic conditions. In addition, we willremain watchful of external developments that could impact on domestic monetary and liquidityconditions.Moreover, in fostering a smooth exit process, the BSP works under the principle of policycoordination. The disciplined approach to macroeconomic policy coordination has kept thecountry in good stead. We will continue to work closely with market participants and theeconomic planning and fiscal authorities in monitoring the situation and preparing for appropriatepolicy responses.Moving forward, additional measures are being crafted and studied by the BSP to ensure thesustained soundness, stability, resilience, and inclusivity of the banking system amidst theongoing health crisis.First, we need to ensure the long-run health of the banking system during and beyond thepandemic. Thus, we are gathering data on the actual impact of the pandemic on the banks andon their clients. Hence, we will review the use of regulatory buffers. The use of these buffersenables banks to absorb losses, expand lending operations and meet the liquidity needs of theirclients, including MSMEs and people living in rural communities, without unduly impairing banks’long-term viability.Second, to complement our regulatory and supervisory initiatives to mitigate the adverse effect ofthe CoVid-19 pandemic, the BSP acknowledges the need to implement the following legislativemeasures:Enactment of the Financial Institutions Strategic Transfer (FIST) Act. This will assist the financialsystem in performing its role of efficiently mobilizing savings and investments for the country’seconomic recovery as well as its sustained growth and development.Amendment of the New Central Bank Act for purposes of strengthening supervision over financialconglomerates. The domestic financial system is dominated by financial conglomerates (FC)that span several financial sectors, including banking, insurance and securities. A betterunderstanding of conglomerate risk is important for regulatory agencies to be able to mitigateimpact of material issues on the financial system.Strengthening of Resolution Powers to Align with International Standards. There is also a need toenact a law on recovery and resolution planning for banks to align the legal framework withinternational standards.Lastly, with the continuous implementation of physical distancing and concern for safety, it canbe expected that people will have greater preference to use electronic payment and financialservices than conduct face-to-face transactions. Hence, we need to adopt measures to quickenthe use of digital platforms to deliver financial services.To expand the reach of digital transactions, we need to increase contactless payment facilities,such as PayMaya and GCash, which can be expanded to include wet markets, retail stores, andpublic utility vehicles (jeep, taxis, tricycle, bus).The adoption of the National QR code standard (“QR Ph”) must be expedited to enableinteroperable payments for person-to-person (P2P) and person-to-merchant (P2M) transactions. 3 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
The scale of the recently launched EGov Pay Facility can be expanded to enable ordinarycitizens to digitally pay government taxes, fees, and charges. These measures will not onlyfacilitate continued flow of financial transactions during and post-crisis but will also enhanceefficient distribution of financial assistance to beneficiaries aside from furthering the inclusioninitiatives of the government.Lastly, physical distancing as the new norm, we expect that people would prefer to use electronicpayment and financial services than conduct face-to- face transactions. Hence, we need toadopt measures to quicken the use of digital platforms to deliver financial services.To expand the reach of digital transactions, we need to increase contactless payment facilities,such as PayMaya and GCash, which can be used for transactions in wet markets, retail stores,and public utility vehicles (jeep, taxis, tricycle, bus).The adoption of the National QR code standard (“QR Ph”) must be expedited to enableinteroperable payments for person-to-person (P2P) and person-to- merchant (P2M)transactions. The scale of the recently launched EGov Pay Facility can be expanded to enableordinary citizens to digitally pay government taxes, fees, and charges.These measures will not only facilitate continued flow of financial transactions during and post-crisis but will also enhance efficient distribution of cash assistance to select citizens. In addition,they will push forward financial inclusion.Let me conclude my presentation with the following take-aways:First, the COVID-19 pandemic, though a health crisis, highlighted the importance of soundmacroeconomic policies. The Philippine economy entered the COVID-19 pandemic in a positionof strength, brought about by years of structural reforms and prudent macroeconomicmanagement. The crisis has likewise reinforced the need to accelerate digital transformation.For the financial system, the BSP is at the forefront of promoting the use of electronic paymentand financial services.Nonetheless, we should unceasingly work to improve the use of these innovative digitaltechnologies to support economic activities.Second, the immediate challenge is to provide tangible boost to the economy through the rightcombination of fiscal and monetary measures. Having already implemented a host of measuresto build upon liquidity and keep companies afloat, the BSP’s policy space remains sufficient. TheBSP has yet to exhaust the conventional monetary instruments in its toolkit to support theeconomy, should conditions warrant.Third, the decision to unwind COVID-19 policy responses must be done in a gradual, prudentand informed manner. Complete risk assessment based on all available data must support thedecision and timing of unwinding. Likewise, appropriate communication must accompany thedecision to unwind.Finally, we will continue to work as one with market participants and the relevant governmentagencies in carrying out appropriate responses in a timely manner, in support of the NationalGovernment’s broader efforts to address the impact of the pandemic on the economy.Thank you and good day. 4 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
Benjamin E Diokno: Road to recovery - turning crisis intoopportunitiesSpeech by Mr Benjamin E Diokno, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the centralbank of the Philippines), at the Manila Times Online Forum, 29 June 2020.*   *   *Manila Times President and CEO Dante “Klink” Ang, Chief Operating Officer Blanca Mercado,other Manila Times officers and staff, members of the media, ladies and gentlemen. Goodafternoon and thank you for inviting me to this Manila Times Online Forum.I adopted your theme, “Road to Recovery: Turning Crisis into Opportunities” as the title of mypresentation today. We are three and a half months into the lockdown. Cautiously but surely, weare getting back on our feet.Even as the COVID-19 uncertainty continues, I am optimistic that we can overcome this crisis.Let me share BSP’s views on growth and recovery after this pandemic.This is a snapshot of the terrain after the outbreak of COVID-19.The domestic financial markets were racked by heightened volatility following the outbreak of theCOVID-19 pandemic. We saw a sharp decline in portfolio inflows in the first two months of 2020.The stock market index noted on March 19 its lowest year-to-date record since October 11,2011.We have had serious exogenous shocks in the first quarter — the Taal volcano eruption, US-China trade tensions, African swine fever. But nothing comes close to the COVID-19 pandemicthat has brought the global economy to a halt.The confluence of these shocks resulted in the contraction of the economy by 0.2 percent in thefirst quarter of 2020. This is the first negative real GDP growth since 1998 when the economywrestled with El Nino and the Asian Financial Crisis. In its latest assessment, the Development Budget Coordination Committee forecasts a full-yearcontraction of – 2.0 to – 3.4 percent (NEDA, 13 May 2020).On a positive note, the peso appears to buck the trend as most regional currencies havedepreciated significantly against the US dollar. The peso is the least depreciated currency amongits peers. We have hefty gross international reserves estimated at US$93.3 billion in May. Weforecast that the year-end GIR will reach US$95 billion.Despite the bleak global picture, there is reason to be optimistic about the future of the Philippineeconomy.The long reform agenda that the government has consistently pursued across administrationshas allowed the country to achieve a more broad-based growth. The volatility of real GDP andinflation considerably declined over time. Aggregate demand in the post global financial crisisperiod expanded at an average rate of 6.4 percent annually, comparable to the growth rates ofChina and India.We have a hefty foreign exchange reserves, low public sector debt, manageable externalpayments position, and a solid credit profile. The country’s external debt-to-GDP ratio is only 21.4percent as of end-March 2020 down from about 60.0 percent in 2005.Philippine banks are well-capitalized. Their liquidity positions are strong, and non-performing 1 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
loans are low – proof of the effectiveness of progressive banking regulatory reforms we haveimplemented over the years.In a recent survey released just this May by The Economist, among 66 emerging economies, thePhilippines is ranked the 6th most robust on the basis of four measures of financial strength,namely, public debt, foreign debt, cost of borrowing, and reserve cover.When the coronavirus crisis broke out in the country, the government had, and continues tohave, adequate fiscal and monetary policy space which it immediately deployed to calm downthe market and ease liquidity pressures.For its part, the BSP promptly implemented measures to ease liquidity and sustain the flow ofcredit that have calmed down market jitters.Recognizing the importance of MSMEs in the economy, the BSP allowed banks to include newMSME loans as part of their compliance with the required reserve ratio.The credit risk weight of MSME loans that are current in status was temporarily reduced whileMSME loans with government guarantee were assigned zero weight. These policy measures areaimed at encouraging more lending to MSMEs.However, our optimism is also tempered by a sense of realism that there are still much work tobe done.We have a good head start with the economic and regulatory buffers we built over the years. Butthese can be easily eroded given the huge resource requirement of the crisis responsemeasures.As we restart the economy, we remain vigilant because the risk of COVID-19 remains high. Wecontinue to maintain a disciplined approach to policy coordination and decision-making.The crisis has exposed the vulnerabilities and gaps in existing processes and systems that weneed to swiftly deal with to recover lost momentum because of this pandemic.Let me expound on four critical structural reform imperatives that I believe are opportunities forgrowth that we should seize.First is the modernization of the country’s health system to ensure efficient public healthinfrastructure and resilient crisis preparedness framework.This would require giving incentives for the use of science and technology in health policydecision making. It would require overhauling of the healthcare supply chain management. The government must also initiate the formulation of a national preparedness and responseframework for disease outbreaks and pandemics, taking into account coordination gaps acrossdifferent levels of government.Second is the need to upgrade the Information and Communication Technology (ICT)infrastructure system and processes. Technology will play a pivotal role in reshaping the meansof production and the delivery of goods and services in the post-COVID world.Digital technology will also be critical in enabling simpler and more efficient transactions withgovernment agencies. Business transactions such as online retail, online banking, onlinemedical consultations, and digital payments will become a necessity. All these need to besupported by a safe and reliable digital infrastructure system with robust and dependablecybersecurity protection. 2 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
Third is the modernization of Philippine agriculture and the government’s supply chainmanagement system with the aid of digital technologies. This will help ensure that food and otheressential goods and services are available, accessible, and affordable.Fourth is the development of a highly skilled and resilient workforce by strengthening theeducational system, sustained upskilling, and adequate health protection to future-proof ourworkforce. In this way, the country’s productive capacity can benefit more strongly from itsfavorable demographics.The structural reform imperatives I have outlined are outside the ambit of BSP. Yet they haveprofound impact on the realization of the BSP’s policy thrusts.Against this backdrop, what else can the BSP do?The BSP’s policy space remains sufficient. The BSP has yet to exhaust the conventionalmonetary instruments in its toolkit to support the liquidity requirements of the economy, shouldconditions warrant.Given the possibility of higher defaults and non-performing loans, there may be scope to offermore debt restructuring measures.We agree in principle with the goals of the proposed Philippine Economic Stimulus Act of 2020.The act seeks to ease the plight of workers, families and businesses who were adverselyaffected by the COVID-19 pandemic.It also aims to facilitate recovery and preserve the country’s economic growth. As in anymeasure providing support using public funds, prudence has to be observed to rein in excessivemoral hazards that may arise.Human behavior is expected to change with physical distancing as the new norm. People areexpected to prefer using electronic payment and financial services to face-to-face and over-the-counter transactions. To expand the reach of digital transactions, we need to increase contactless payment facilities,such as PayMaya and GCash. Their use can be expanded to include wet markets, retail stores,and public utility vehicles (jeep, taxis, tricycle, bus). We need to quicken the adoption of the National QR code standard (“QR Ph”) to enableinteroperable payments for person-to-person (P2P) and person-to-merchant (P2M) transactions.The scale of the recently launched EGov Pay Facility can be expanded to enable ordinarycitizens to digitally pay government taxes, fees, and charges. The speedy implementation of the national ID system will enable inclusive and innovative digitalfinance and ensure reliable database for the design and impact assessment of policies, includingthose for taxation and social support purposes.With the increased usage of non-bank channels to send and receive money, the BSP has beenimproving channels of remittances with the approval of new technologies in remittance transfers(mobile phones, internet, cash cards).Admittedly, insufficient IT infrastructure leading to the slow internet connection, data privacy andcybersecurity risks, and lack of knowledge on new technologies may pose challenges in theimplementation of financial digital services. Promoting financial literacy and ensuring goodmarket conduct are likewise important to deepen the public’s trust in digital financial services.Moving forward, more measures should be taken to reduce external vulnerabilities. 3 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
Congress, meanwhile, must provide additional measures to reduce the costs of doing businessin the Philippines; streamline the investment process; and increase business confidence byimproving the business climate, fostering competition, and boosting productivity growth via theCorporate Recovery and Tax Incentives for Enterprises Act (CREATE)and amendments to thePublic Services Act.Former US President John F. Kennedy once said, “The Chinese use two brush strokes to writethe word ‘crisis.’ One brush stroke stands for danger; the other for opportunity.In a crisis, be aware of the danger—but recognize the opportunity.”The COVID-19 pandemic may be unprecedented in scale, but as in most global economiccrises, it provides important lessons to governments in terms of preparing for similar challengesand seizing opportunities to move forward.The pandemic emphasizes the importance of building sufficient buffers during good times andthe need to speed up the modernization of the country’s ICT infrastructure and policies.The list of reform possibilities is longer than what I have offered. There are deep learnings thatwe should collectively heed if we are to rise above the crisis and forge ahead towards the goal ofa stronger and more inclusive society.Thank you and good day 4 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
Benjamin E Diokno: Remarks of the GovernorRemarks by Mr Benjamin E Diokno, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the centralbank of the Philippines), at the Press Conference on Macroprudential Policy Direction and PublicRelease of the April 2020 FSR, Manila, 23 June 2020.*   *   *Colleagues, friends from the media, good morning.Thank you for joining us at this press briefing of the Financial Stability Coordination Council orFSCC. The other members of the Executive Committee of the FSCC are with us online and weare happy to dialogue with you today and in many more occasions in the future.We are holding this briefing to share with you our view on the emerging risks, amidst the COVID-19 pandemic. Indeed, the world is facing the deepest global recession whose effects the IMFsays have not been seen since the 1929 Great Depression.Yet, our present situation is different because it was not caused by a stock market crash like“Black Tuesday” in 1929 or from excessive credit as was the case in 1997 and 2007.Rather than financial market vulnerabilities affecting the macroeconomy, COVID-19 has directlyimpacted the macroeconomy itself. While we address the public health issues, we want toensure that these difficulties do not contaminate our financial system and trigger a negativefeedback to the real economy.Ensuring the continued health of the financial system requires a whole-of-market approach.This is where the FSCC plays a critical role in bringing together the Department of Finance, theSecurities and Exchange Commission, the Insurance Commission, the Philippine DepositInsurance Corporation, the Bureau of the Treasury and the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas tocollaborate and address disruptions to and by the financial system which can adversely affectthe rest of the economy.We do this by assessing the risk behaviors of those in the financial market, looking at how theyinteract with one another, identifying the channels through which they interact and, appraisinghow the outcomes at the level of the overall system can be very different from the simple sum ofthe parts.You will hear us talk about “macroprudential policies” which refer to our interventions formanaging systemic risks. I should emphasize that the “systemic-ness” of risks is not defined bythe size of the initial shock but rather by the pervasiveness of its full effects. We are as mindful ofthe big shocks as we are of small shocks that can morph into bigger and more extensive risks tothe system.Let me use COVID-19 as an analogy. COVID-19 may have started with infected individuals, but ithas spread so massively that we are now treating both individuals and economies. Thisepitomizes systemic risk.For the same reason, the FSCC looks at the interactions of risk behaviors throughout thefinancial system. The system is a network of connected chains and any chain is only as strongas its most vulnerable link. The FSCC is where we assess vulnerabilities and strengths incontextualizing the collective network.As chairperson of the FSCC, I want to assure the public that the health of the financial system –the details of the underlying interlinkages – is a continuous concern at the highest level of policy.We want to ensure the sustained health of the financial system to serve the financial needs of 1 / 2BIS central bankers' speeches
the public as well as be an anchor for our ongoing recovery efforts.As a sign of our commitment and our responsiveness to the times, the FSCC is proud toannounce that today, we are launching the maiden semestral issue with the April 2020 release. Iwill ask our Technical secretariat to provide more details later in the press conference.I also want to take this opportunity to share with you two other important initiatives. We will bereleasing the national Macroprudential Policy Strategy Framework. This document provides aclear narrative of the policy mindset that we have in place when thinking of systemic risk issues.Also, our work is underway in formalizing a Systemic Risk Crisis Management framework.This organizes the efforts of the financial authorities to assess and act should a systemicdisruption to financial markets occur.We are pursuing this not because we see any imminent vulnerability that rises to the threshold ofbeing “systemic”. Rather, the framework is a pre-emptive initiative, fully cognizant that its bestuse is when it is not in use but fully prepared nonetheless when the times call for it.Allow me also to thank the FSCC-member agencies whose principals – Finance SecretaryDominguez, SEC Chairperson Aquino, Commissioner Funa of the IC, and PDIC President Tan –make time from their busy schedules to engage in candid conversations and agree on theappropriate next steps.At the FSCC, we all understand that the continued health of the financial system is critical. Butwe also know that the value of a strong and resilient financial system is not the ultimate goal.Rather, the ultimate goal is a thriving economy. This is where a whole-of-market collaboration –from finance to fiscal to national development, entrepreneurship, industries, infrastructure,among others – is a value proposition for the general public. This is why mitigating systemic risksis all about public welfare.Thank you and once again, good morning. 2 / 2BIS central bankers' speeches
Page 1 of 16    Lecture by Lesetja Kganyago,  Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the Wits School of Governance  Johannesburg 18 June 2020  The South African Reserve Bank, the coronavirus shock,  and ‘the age of magic money’   Good afternoon  It is now clear that the COVID-19 outbreak will produce the worst economic downturn in a century. We expect that ‘the great lockdown’ will cause output to contract by about 7% this year. The last time a figure of that magnitude appears in our data is 1931, during the Great Depression, when output fell by 6.2%. It had declined by 6.1% in 1930.   The South African Reserve Bank (SARB) has responded flexibly, quickly and aggressively to this crisis. So far, these actions have improved market functioning, and are supporting economic activity. However, the larger economic outlook remains uncertain. We are watching the data closely, and we are ready to act as appropriate, in accordance with our mandate.  Fortunately, central bank governors tend to get a lot of advice, and I have been particularly well-supplied with suggestions for SARB policy recently. Allow me to add to the national public debate today.  I will cover four main points.  
Page 2 of 16   First, the bond-buying programmes fall on a spectrum, running from limited to larger interventions. Conducting any of them successfully is made possible by our inflation-targeting framework and the flexible approach we take to it.  Second, the scale of asset buying we do should follow from a clear sense of why markets have been malfunctioning. I’ll distinguish between liquidity and sustainability problems. Central banks can provide liquidity, while challenges like fiscal sustainability are best dealt with elsewhere.   Third, we need more clarity around the mechanics of central bank asset purchases, quantitative easing (QE), and the ‘zero lower-bound’. These concepts are pretty hard to understand. It is easy, for example, to take the mistaken view that QE is ‘free money’.  Finally, I will reflect on the utility of inflation targeting for addressing the current economic conditions and potential depression-type conditions. The intellectual heritage of inflation targeting traces back to the study of the Great Depression, so we can say that depression fighting is ‘in its genes’.  As a starting point, it is perhaps worth reviewing what we have done to date. Our five most important measures have been as follows.   1. We have lowered interest rates. At the March meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), we reduced the repurchase rate (repo rate) by 100 basis points. We then held an emergency MPC meeting in April, using new forecasts that incorporated the lockdown, and cut the repo rate by another 100 basis points. In May, we cut it by a further 50 basis points. Including our January cut, the cumulative reduction in the repo rate for 2020 now stands at 275 basis 
Page 3 of 16  points.1 To compare, the emerging market median is 100 basis points.2 The repo rate is now at its lowest level on record, and below zero in real terms.   2. We have made liquidity abundantly available to banks, through a range of facilities in addition to our usual weekly repo auctions, with take-up peaking at R83 billion in March.  3. We have provided regulatory relief to the financial sector, to help maintain the flow of credit in the economy despite the temporary payment problems for firms and households caused by the COVID-19 shock.3  4. We have offered funding for small and medium enterprises (SMEs), starting at R100 billion, with an option to scale up to R200 billion over time, or about 4% of gross domestic product (GDP). This facility is backstopped by a guarantee from National Treasury.  5. We have been buying government bonds in the secondary market, to improve market functioning. The total of new purchases now stands at around R25 billion, which is an increase in our bond portfolio of about 0.6% of GDP from pre-crisis levels. This is comparable to purchases by emerging market peers.4                                                        1 The cumulative reduction in the repo rate stands at 300 basis points since July 2019. 2 As of 4 June 2020, based on a sample of 66 emerging markets. Large cuts from high starting points, as in Argentina (-1 200 basis points, from 50%), distort the mean change, making the median a better representation of the central tendency of the data. 3 For details, see the Prudential Authority’s ‘Press release on regulatory relief measures and guidance to the banking sector in response to COVID-19, published on 6 April 2020, available at https://www.resbank.co.za/Lists/News%20and%20Publications/Attachments/9842/Prudential%20Authority%20Media%20Release%20-%20Regulatory%20relief%20and%20guidance%20to%20the%20banking%20sector.pdf. 4 The Bank for International Settlements (BIS) gives data for bond purchases by seven emerging markets. Of these countries, four have purchased bonds worth 0.2% of GDP or less, Thailand is at 0.6% of GDP, Colombia at 0.8% of GDP and Chile at 2.8% of GDP (in Chile, the policy rate is now at its ‘technical minimum’, according to MPC minutes). The SARB’s purchases to date, as of the latest published data, are at 0.6% of GDP. See Yavus Arslan, Mathias Drehmanm and Boris Hofman, 2 June 2020, ‘Central bank bond purchases in emerging market economies, Bank for International Settlements Bulletin No. 20, available at https://www.bis.org/publ/bisbull20.pdf. 
Page 4 of 16  Of these interventions, it is the last one that has prompted the most discussion, so it deserves extra attention.   A spectrum of bond buying  In responding to the COVID-19 crisis, a whole range of central banks, both in advanced economies and in emerging markets, has launched bond-buying programmes. These programmes should be thought of as sitting on a spectrum, measured by what the various central banks are trying to do. Some are buying huge quantities of assets to provide stimulus despite the constraint of the zero lower-bound. Others are conducting more limited purchases, to improve market functioning. Many advanced economies sit on the far side of the spectrum. Some emerging markets, like Brazil, and us, sit at the near end: we are aiming to improve market functioning.5    Recognising this distinction, the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) has referred to emerging market operations as ‘Bond Purchase Programmes’, or BPPs.6 Others have put the term ‘QE’ in quotation marks, to convey the nuance. Sometimes I think that if we just told people our asset purchases were QE, they might stop complaining that ‘the SARB is conservative’ – a criticism that has somehow survived despite surprise at how much the SARB has already done. We should not, however, simply assume that our conditions require full-blown QE, or that we can pull it off without creating unintended and damaging consequences down the road.     Rather, any decision to move along the spectrum needs to be embedded in our inflation-targeting framework. Getting the inflation forecast right gives us credibility to shift along the bond-buying policy spectrum without tipping into higher inflation. If inflation is collapsing and existing policy measures prove not enough to bring it back to target, we can move further. Judging by the recent moderation in long-term rates and lower inflation levels, it appears we have got the overall policy effort about right                                                       5 Bryan Harris, 8 June 2020, ‘Brazil central bank chief resists using new QE powers’, Financial Times, available at https://www.ft.com/content/e6eb0759-3a14-47ec-9835-a0b5d509b97c. 6 Yavus Arslan, Mathias Drehman and Boris Hofman, 2 June 2020, ‘Central bank bond purchases in emerging market economies’, Bank for International Settlements Bulletin No. 20, available at https://www.bis.org/publ/bisbull20.pdf. 
Page 5 of 16  for the moment. But we are in an environment of unprecedented uncertainty, and we will adjust this policy effort, along that spectrum, as economic conditions and forecasts change.   The South African Reserve Bank’s bond purchases  When the SARB began intervening in the South African government bond market, on 20 March, we had seen trading thin out, with even small transactions causing bond prices to move abruptly. By purchasing bonds in the secondary market, the SARB has helped restart price discovery and has encouraged the re-entry of private sector participants.   We continue to monitor the government bond market and to buy bonds where we observe signs of stress at different maturities of the yield curve. This will continue as needed to restore normal market functioning. Up to now, it appears our interventions have worked. Volatility has subsided, and bond yields have largely normalised. While we are not targeting yields specifically, the fact that the benchmark 10-year yield is back to where it was in February suggests that stress in the system has eased.   We are not the only country experiencing liquidity problems in its bond market. Indeed, at the height of the crisis, even the ultra-deep and liquid United States (US) Treasury market was disrupted, which just goes to show that, in a major crisis, even the best borrowers can have liquidity problems.7 Solving these problems is one of the oldest duties of central banks; such practices are literally centuries older than the term ‘quantitative easing’.  The trouble is that liquidity problems are not the only factor affecting the domestic bond market. There are also problems of fiscal sustainability in the mix, which requires us to act, and to communicate, with caution. We need to avoid what one expert has                                                       7 Jeffrey Cheng, David Wessel and Joshua Younger, 1 May 2020, ‘How did COVID-19 disrupt the market for US Treasury debt?’, available at https://www.brookings.edu/blog/up-front/2020/05/01/how-did-covid-19-disrupt-the-market-for-u-s-treasury-debt/. 
Page 6 of 16  called ‘the mother of all sudden stops’8 turning into a permanent, and specifically South African, problem.   In general, I avoid commenting on fiscal issues, but it is difficult to discuss sustainability without mentioning some fiscal facts. The most important ones are these.   When the COVID-19 shock hit, South Africa was already running crisis-level deficits – over 6% of GDP in 2019. Our debt stock was on a rising trajectory.9 Unfortunately, the coronavirus is now forcing an additional fiscal deterioration.   This has resulted in South Africa losing its last investment-grade credit rating. Market-based measures of sovereign risk, such as credit default swaps, have deteriorated further, both in absolute terms and relative to peers. This increase in sovereign risk has, in turn, further raised the return on bonds asked by investors, shifting up long-term rates for the whole economy, despite a very low repo rate.   As many economists have pointed out, sustainability concerns have to be addressed at a fiscal level. This means that the debt-to-GDP ratio has to stabilise, and those projections need to be realistic. If debt sustainability can be assured, with high probability, then near-term borrowing will be more readily available. In these circumstances, were government still to experience financing disruptions, we would feel confident that these were liquidity problems which the SARB could help address. However, presently, sustainability is not assured, which makes large-scale sovereign bond buying potentially inflationary.                                                          8 Barry Eichengreen, quoted in Enda Curran and Michelle Jamrisko, 2 April 2020, ‘The same stimulus that rich countries lean on could worsen poor economies’, Bloomberg Quint, available at https://www.bloombergquint.com/global-economics/a-mother-of-all-sudden-stops-leaves-emerging-markets-in-crisis. 9 Philippe Burger and Estian Calitz, 24 February 2020, ‘Soaring deficits and debt: restoring sustainability amidst low economic growth’, available at https://www.econ3x3.org/article/soaring-deficits-and-debt-restoring-sustainability-amidst-low-economic-growth. 
Page 7 of 16  The proposals on the table for more bond buying are not modest. I have seen one call for a trillion-rand fiscal stimulus financed by the SARB10, and another for SARB bond purchases of R10-20 billion per week to continue until ‘economic recovery is well underway’11. These numbers imply that the SARB would be buying, more or less, all new debt for the foreseeable future. Such interventions would crowd pension funds and other institutional investors out of the bond market.   Worse, we would be sending a dangerous signal. The crisis of the euro area, a few years back, showed how damaging it can be for countries to send mixed messages about their future monetary arrangements – the so-called ‘re-denomination risk’. In South Africa, the risk is that the domestic currency will no longer be issued by a credible, inflation-targeting central bank, but by one that is fully financing the public sector instead. Should we be going this way, some bondholders would probably be enthusiastic about a large bond purchase programme so they could dump their bonds on the SARB and minimise their losses. And why shouldn’t they be looking for a way out? Imagine the situation: we would be taking over public sector financing, with no clear plan for how to stop buying a potentially ever-larger issuance of bonds.   And although I have heard it suggested that we should do QE with conditions, we need to keep in mind that we are a national central bank.12 The Constitution tells me the SARB must protect the value of the currency, and that we must have regular discussions with the Finance Minister. Nowhere does it say I can set conditions. As such, the SARB cannot take responsibility for solving a fiscal sustainability problem, nor can it jeopardise the value of the currency by agreeing to inflationary money printing.                                                        10 Owen Willcox, 2020, ‘Macroeconomic response to COVID-19’, available at https://www.tips.org.za/policy-briefs/item/3798-macroeconomic-response-to-covid-19. 11 Andrew Donaldson, 9 April 2020, ‘Monetary management, financial markets and public debt: responding to COVID-19 and the economic standstill’, Policy Brief #3, available at https://covid19economicideas.org/2020/04/09/monetary-management-financial-markets-and-public-debt-responding-to-covid-19-and-the-economic-standstill/. 12 It is relevant to note here that when the European Central Bank (ECB) announced its programme of Outright Monetary Transactions, to give effect to Mario Draghi’s famous ‘whatever it takes’ commitment, it still insisted on ‘strict and effective conditionality’ through ‘an appropriate European Financial Stability Facility / European Stability Mechanism (EFSF/ESM) programme’. The ECB did not itself take on the design or enforcement of conditionality arrangements. See https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pr/date/2012/html/pr120906_1.en.html. 
Page 8 of 16   Money creation, inflation and sterilisation  But why is it that monetary financing of the fiscus could be inflationary? As I have said elsewhere, I am not worried about high inflation this year, especially given the recent collapse of oil prices. But the fact that 2020 inflation is likely to be low in no way guarantees that inflation will stay low, and therefore that we can stop worrying about it permanently. In fact, if we commenced large-scale QE with a significantly positive inflation rate, we would have to do one of two things: either sterilise the QE purchases by absorbing those Rands back onto our balance sheet, or let interest rates fall below the MPC target, ultimately to zero. The problem with setting the repo rate too low is inflation. The problem with sterilisation is the cost. QE proponents in South Africa have not appreciated the inescapability of this choice.   Let me explain how this works in more detail.   When the central bank creates money, we create one very specific type of money, which is bank reserves, also called base money. The base-money system is a closed loop, which means that the central bank, as the monopoly provider of new base money, is the only institution that can change the total supply in the system. This is the basis for monetary policy, because it confers the power to set the price of bank reserves.13   When a central bank conducts a QE operation, or any other kind of asset purchase, it pays in base money, which it deposits into the central bank account of the seller, be it government or a commercial bank. This changes the total supply of bank reserves in the system. The change in supply, in turn, affects the price. The crucial implication is that unsterilised asset purchases are, in the words of two economists, ‘tantamount to                                                       13 On this point, and for a broader review of how different parts of the money supply are created, see ‘Money creation in the modern economy’, especially pp. 21-25, in the Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin Q1 of 2014, available at https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/quarterly-bulletin/2014/money-creation-in-the-modern-economy. 
Page 9 of 16  an easing of interest rate policy’14. As I’ll explain in more detail later, this is the main reason such policies can be inflationary.     During this crisis, we at the SARB have already expanded the supply of central bank money, and although we have seen some deviation of short-term rates from the repo target, these have not been too large or persistent. In practice, we have a deposit rate set at 200 basis points below repo, which functions as a floor for the system – it is essentially a sterilisation instrument.15 As predicted by theory, we have therefore seen actual short-term rates fluctuate between the repo rate and this deposit rate, although they have mostly stayed close to the repo rate.   Of course, our interventions have not been going on too long, and this has been a period of severe stress in financial markets. Were we to implement a large, long-term increase in bank reserves, as would be required for a big QE programme, we would need to sterilise more aggressively to keep the actual overnight rate close to the repo target.   To do this, we could use various techniques. For instance, we could issue SARB debentures to soak up Rands, or we could pay banks to deposit their reserves back with us. Most of these policies would end up looking functionally equivalent to National Treasury funding itself at the short end of the curve,16 benefitting from the low rates set by monetary policy, which is already happening. Importantly, none of these scenarios would be a free lunch: instead of Treasury paying interest, the costs would show up at the SARB, as the price of doing sterilisation operations.                                                         14 Claudio Borio and Piti Disyatat, November 2009, ‘Unconventional monetary policies: an appraisal’, available at https://www.bis.org/publ/work292.pdf. These authors also discuss, as an alternative inflation driver, the possibility that public narratives about central bank actions will also have economic effects. 15 This point is equivalent to the one made for India by former Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, Raghuram Rajan, in his widely circulated LinkedIn post titled ‘Monetization: neither game-changer nor catastrophe in abnormal times’, specifically point 5. 16 Claudio Borio, 8 November 2019, ‘Wise fiscal policy is not about helicopter money’, available at https://www.bis.org/speeches/sp191108.htm#:~:text=A%20more%20balanced%20policy%20mix,rates%20further%20into%20negative%20territory  
Page 10 of 16  These costs would also be large. If we as the SARB bought R500 billion of government bonds, at par, and then sterilised them at the repo rate, we would be insolvent in about a year.17 For this reason, taking the perspective of the broader public sector balance sheet, these operations would add to National Treasury’s already large need to borrow. As such, a big QE operation wouldn’t lift the budget constraint. Instead, it would end up saddling Treasury with yet another bankrupt government enterprise asking for a bailout.   The only exception to the rule that asset purchases entail sterilisation costs is if interest rates reach the zero lower-bound. This happens if even a zero interest rate is not enough to achieve a central bank’s objectives, like hitting an inflation target. In this case, central banks can create enormous quantities of bank reserves, which just pile up on their balance sheets without creating any further downward pressure on overnight rates. The reason for this is that banks with excess reserves will have no incentive to lend them out for less than 0% interest. This has been the exact situation of major advanced economies for much of the past decade, and it has given these central banks almost unlimited scope to buy assets. Given this extraordinary situation, one economist has described this as ‘the age of magic money’.18   This is not, however, the situation in most emerging markets. For us, a persistent and unsterilised increase in bank reserves would create downward pressure on interest rates. If this pressure were not released through sterilisation, it would force overnight rates to zero and keep them there. This is likely to be inflationary, even in a weak economy. Creating extra reserves lowers the effective short-term interest rate compared to the repo rate set by the MPC, whether demand in the economy is weak or not.  The trick, therefore, is to figure out what the appropriate short-term rate for South Africa is. Market expectations are that it will remain above 3% over the next few years. Our projections show much the same, and that this will be enough to return inflation                                                       17 The SARB’s capital and accumulated reserves were R20 billion as of 2018/19. Sterilisation costs for R500 billion would be around R19 billion a year.  18 Sebastian Mallaby, July/August 2020, ‘The age of magic money’, Foreign Affairs, available at https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/united-states/2020-05-29/pandemic-financial-crisis. 
Page 11 of 16  to the 4.5% target midpoint. Even some proponents of SARB QE have acknowledged that a zero repo rate is too low for South Africa, and that it should at least be the rate ruling in the developed world plus a risk premium.19   Credit and saving behaviour is part of the story here, but we also need to consider the exchange rate effects, in addition to the inflation expectations channel. Remember: because we have inflation several percentage points higher than in the advanced economies, our real rates can go quite a bit lower than theirs. If we really need to create extra inflation, we can set the repo rate to be minus 2% or minus 3% in inflation-adjusted terms, and then we’ll get inflation led by the exchange rate.   Inflation targeting in a crisis  This raises a really interesting question, however, about whether we are heading into another Great Depression, in which case such radical policies might become appropriate. There is no agreed definition of a depression, but the outstanding characteristics of the last Great Depression were large and sustained falls in both output and prices. To be clear: this is not our baseline forecast, nor is it the outlook according to all available quantitative projections. Nonetheless, we understand that we live in a highly uncertain world, and that conditions could deteriorate further. It is therefore worth contemplating how the SARB would react in a depression scenario.  One of the extraordinary things about the Great Depression is that our understanding of what went wrong, and why, has evolved dramatically over the ensuing decades. The popular contemporary view, which still features in high-school accounts of the Depression, is that it was caused by a stock market crash. But the US stock market crashed many times, both before and after 1929, with much less disastrous results. Another popular explanation is that the Depression was caused by a collapse in demand, which was only ultimately resolved by active New Deal fiscal policies. But                                                       19 See, for instance, Christopher Malikane, 17 May 2020, ‘Why arguments against quantitative easing hold no water’, Business Day, available at  https://www.businesslive.co.za/bd/opinion/2020-05-17-why-arguments-against-quantitative-easing-hold-no-water/ 
Page 12 of 16  this explanation is also given secondary status by most modern scholars, who emphasise, instead, the role of central banks.20   As former US Federal Reserve (Fed) Chairman Ben Bernanke once said: “Regarding the Great Depression … We did it. We’re very sorry … [W]e won’t do it again.”21 By this account, the major mistakes were threefold.   First, central banks permitted large-scale bank failures, destroying credit intermediation and contracting the money supply.   Second, and largely in response to the first factor, countries fell into deflation, which pushed up the real value of debt, bankrupting borrowers. For instance, in the US, prices fell by almost 10% a year in the worst years of the Depression.   Finally, central banks stuck to fixed exchange rates via the gold standard, which required some badly timed interest rate increases, such as the Fed’s decision to raise rates by 200 basis points in October 1931. Imagine raising rates with negative inflation and real rates already in double digits!   It was precisely these sorts of central bank mistakes that turned sharp downturns into depressions, and then prolonged those depressions. When these mistakes were reversed, countries recovered.22   This is relevant because modern central banks, including the SARB, have policy frameworks to avoid precisely these errors. We have symmetric price stability mandates, expressed in inflation targets, which tell central bankers to avoid too high and too low inflation. We have floating exchange rates which absorb shocks rather than magnifying them, and our accumulated credibility is now such that we can slash interest rates despite large exchange rate depreciations. We have financial stability                                                       20 These points are drawn from Ben S. Bernanke, 2 March 2004, ‘Remarks by Governor Ben S. Bernanke: money, gold, and the Great Depression’, available at https://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2004/200403022/default.htm. 21 Ben S. Bernanke, 8 November 2002, ‘On Milton Friedman’s ninetieth birthday’, available at https://www.federalreserve.gov/BOARDDOCS/SPEECHES/2002/20021108/. 22 See Liaquet Ahamed, 2009, Lords of Finance, especially chapter 20, titled ‘Gold fetters’. 
Page 13 of 16  mandates to ensure that the financial system keeps functioning under stress, and that too-big-to-fail institutions don’t.   In sum, far from being irrelevant in a depression scenario, our frameworks incorporate the most profound lessons of the Great Depression. If we start to go down this path, our frameworks will immediately guide us to take remedial action. This fact alone should protect us from another Great Depression.   Conclusion  Frankly, rather than 1929 repeating itself, I am more worried about a different scenario. As a country, we have got ourselves into a lot of trouble. We are struggling to learn the lessons of these mistakes, and to achieve the consensus to fix them. And we are running out of time. We have just completed our worst growth decade on record – worse than the 1980s or the 1990s. On a per capita basis, South Africans have been getting poorer since 2013.   In the world, we are slipping backwards. In 1960, South African incomes were around 26% of those in the US. They are now down to 13%. They were 128% of Brazil’s in 1960, a country to which we are often compared; they are now down to 65%. Rather, we risk following Argentina’s path, where ideological conflicts and unstable macroeconomic policies produced a steady economic decline.23   In much of the period after 1994, we in South Africa surprised everyone by cooperating despite our differences, and delivering robust and sustainable macroeconomic policies. But those accomplishments have faded. Instead, we now find ourselves sitting on the highest debt pile in our history, arguing about printing money and waving ideological banners at each other.                                                         23 For a quick review of this experience, see ‘The tragedy of Argentina: a century of decline’, 17 February 2014, The Economist, available at https://www.economist.com/briefing/2014/02/17/a-century-of-decline. 
Page 14 of 16  It seems imperative that we work hard to define a new approach for the future. We have used up the legacy of low debt levels. Fortunately, we have achieved low inflation. We cannot squander that achievement on the quixotic belief that if we just engineer higher inflation, somehow growth will permanently rise. Our own experience shows that belief to be wrong, and we can set out now on a new path with low interest rates if we guard and value them. We have nearly all the ingredients needed to get permanently stronger economic growth, create jobs, and rid ourselves of poverty and inequality. But we need to choose, as a society, to do these things.    First, let’s make sustainable choices that get us past the COVID-19 pandemic and help us grow in future.    Second, let’s open up for investment to increase our productivity.   Finally, let’s work together, pragmatically, to choose the reforms that will create jobs and prosperity.   Thank you.    
Page 15 of 16  Supporting charts    0.010.10.130.20.60.60.82.800.511.522.53BoliviaSouth KoreaMexicoIndiaThailandSouth AfricaColombiaChile% of GDPCentral bank bond-buying programmes**AnnouncedMarch/April 2020. Sources: BIS & SARB-16.0-14.0-12.0-10.0-8.0-6.0-4.0-2.00.0Percent of GDP2020 General government balance projectionsSource: IMF Fiscal Monitor, Apr 2020
Page 16 of 16              29.8-20-1001020304050pp of GDPEM debt stocks:Change between 2009-19Source: IMF-2-101234520122014201620182020%Estimated term premium:10y bondSource: SARB-100-80-60-40-200204060Basis pointsEM 10y govt bond yields:Change from 1 Jan -17 JunSource: Bloomberg020406080100120140160180200ChinaThailandRussiaMalaysiaChileIndonesiaMexicoColombiaSouth AfricaBrazilTurkeyBasis pointsEM 5y CDS spreads:Change from 1 Jan -17 JunSource: Bloomberg
Gabriel Makhlouf: Publication of the Financial Stability Review2020:1Remarks by Mr Gabriel Makhlouf, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, on the publication ofthe Financial Stability Review 2020:1, Dublin, 16 June 2020.*   *   *This afternoon we are publishing our latest semi-annual Financial Stability Review (FSR). TheFSR is one of the main ways we communicate our thinking on the risks facing the economy andfinancial system, how well the financial system as a whole can face those risks, and the policyactions that we are taking (among others) to safeguard financial stability and ensure the financialsystem supports households and businesses in a sustainable way. Our aim remains to have aresilient financial system that can absorb and not amplify adverse shocks, one that performs itsessential function to support the real economy through both good times and bad.I think it is not an over-statement if I say that developments so far in 2020 underline the necessityof that approach. COVID-19 has been a public health crisis the likes of which almost none of ushave seen in our lifetime. It has also brought in its wake an economic shock unprecedented inscale and speed. And it has been a test of the financial system like no other in the last decade.Unlike the experience of a decade ago, the financial system is not the origin of the currentchallenges but, like the rest of the economy, it is affected by them. We are perhaps only at theend of the beginning of seeing those challenges emerge.As we have taken stock of what this means for domestic financial stability in the FSR, I thinkthere are three key messages emerging.First, the speed, size and pervasive nature of the economic shock have presented bothimmediate challenges and tighter financing conditions, as well as a sharp deterioration in themacro-financial outlook, with further downside risks for households, businesses, the publicfinances and the financial sector.Second, households, businesses and the financial system have entered into the current phase ina more resilient position compared to the onset of the financial crisis a decade ago. Indeed, thedomestic banking system has played role in supporting the liquidity needs of households andbusinesses so far in this crisis, including through payment breaks. Looking ahead, the bankingsystem will be making losses. The capital buffers we have asked banks to build up in recentyears are now there to absorb those losses.But, of course, that resilience is not unlimited.Third, the policy actions taken in the area of fiscal and monetary policy – as well asmacroprudential and supervisory policy – have been necessary to mitigate the amplification ofthe immediate shock, enable the financial system to support households and businessesthrough the crisis, and to minimise the extent of longer-term difficulties.As a result of the pandemic we have seen over one million people in receipt of state incomesupport. Alongside the domestic economic shock, Ireland remains sensitive to globaldevelopments, both the near-term global downturn and financial market conditions as well as anylonger-term structural changes that might be triggered by the experience of the pandemic. Closerto home, the outcome of the negotiations on the future EU-UK relationship is also of relevance tothe macro-financial outlook.The immediate strain on households and businesses as a result of the economic shock hasresulted in a necessary increase in public spending: fiscal policy is the first line of defence giventhe unprecedented collapse in economic activity. Government support is also necessary to 1 / 2BIS central bankers' speeches
minimise the risk of a long-term fall in the productive capacity of the economy due to COVID-19.The necessary intervention will result in much higher public debt than what would otherwise havebeen the case. The implications of this will be addressed in the Bank’s next Quarterly Bulletindue to be published on 3 July.The near-term liquidity challenges faced by households and businesses as a result of theCOVID-19 shock are significant and depending on future developments could result in solvencyissues emerging. In the months ahead minimising the extent to which these liquidity issues arefollowed by solvency issues will be important. The banking system has a role to play, and it mustdo so in a sustainable way. Temporary payment breaks that have been introduced are partlyoffsetting the immediate liquidity shock households and businesses are facing, but a portion mayultimately require longer-term solutions. In such cases, the Central Bank expects lenders toensure appropriate solutions, including forbearance, are available. We expect lenders to engagewith borrowers well in advance of the expiry of the payment break to support customers, and ourexisting arrears handling frameworks, including the statutory Code of Conduct on MortgageArrears (CCMA), will apply in the normal manner. Those frameworks are designed to protect theinterests of borrowers, particularly in times where they experience financial difficulties because ofillness or loss of income.However, policy actions in the years since the last financial crisis have contributed to the financialsystem being in a much better place to support households and businesses now. Resilience hasbeen built incrementally through the mortgage measures, and has been locked-in with theactivation of the Countercyclical Capital Buffer (CCyB) and other capital buffers. With the releaseof the CCyB that we announced in mid-March, and the availability of the other capital bufferssuch as the O-SII buffer to absorb losses, banks are in a better position to lend sustainably to thereal economy.To sum up, the COVID-19 crisis is not over and the scale of its economic impact is uncertain.The initial shock is behind us but the macro-financial outlook will depend on a number of factors.Fundamentally, it boils down to the uncertainty over how the pandemic itself will play out: thesuccess of the public health measures and medical advances to tackle it, the capacity andactions of the financial system, households and businesses to absorb and not amplify the shock,and the success of economic and financial stability policies to mitigate its impact. We are, as Isaid, at the end of the beginning.Finally, when we published our previous FSR in early December last year, I spoke about our keyareas of focus going into 2020 from a macro-prudential perspective, and how we weredeveloping our approach to building additional resilience, covering banks, borrowers and non-banks. That agenda remains but events over the last few months have led us to focus our workprogramme to devote more resources to ensuring that the resilience built in recent years can bedrawn upon, as appropriate, to support the economy through the crisis. It is in the wider interestsof the Irish financial system that it continues to provide credit to households and businesses in asustainable way, minimising the extent of the downturn and maximising its contribution to therecovery. 2 / 2BIS central bankers' speeches
Risks, Resilience and Policy Responses to COVID-19 - Deputy Governor Sharon Donneryhttps://www.centralbank.ie/news/article/speeche-risks-resilience-and-policy-responses-to-covid-19-sharon-donnery-17-jun-201/7Good morning, it is a pleasure to address the Institute of International and European Affairs.Today I will speak about the macro  nancial environment in Ireland amid Covid-19, the risks to Irish  nancial stability,both domestic and international, the resilience of the economy and  nancial system that was built up over the lastdecade, and the recent policy responses that we have taken at the Central Bank of Ireland and with our colleagues inEurope.The key message is that while we have built up resilience in the  nancial system over the last decade, we have only seenthe initial economic effects of the pandemic materialise so far. There remains signi cant uncertainty on the path of thevirus, the duration of the shock and the economic implications. Ensuring our policy responses promote a sustainablecontribution from the  nancial system so that it can absorb and not amplify the shock of COVID-19, will remain to theforefront of our minds at the Central Bank.COVID-19 - An exceptional shockCOVID-19 is fundamentally different in nature and scope to previous economic shocks, certainly in my living memory.Firstly, this crisis is truly global. Unlike the 2008/2009  nancial crisis when some emerging markets acted as an engine ofgrowth, today the pandemic is affecting all four corners of the world. The World Bank reports it is the deepest troughsince World War II and the most synchronised since records exist. The OECD has warned of the worst peacetime recession in a century. Their latest numbers, in a single wave scenario,estimate global economic activity to fall 6% this year. In contrast, at the peak of the 2008/2009  nancial crisis, globalgrowth fell by 1.7%. And by the end of May, 102 countries have requested emergency  nancing from the IMF, anunprecedented number.Secondly, the size and speed of the shock is unprecedented. In February, less than one in twenty people in the Irishlabour force were unemployed. By May over one in four were out of work when we take into account those receiving thepandemic unemployment payment (PUP).Risks, Resilience and Policy Responses to COVID-19 - Deputy Governor Sharon Donnery17 June 2020 SpeechDeputy Governor, Sharon Donnery, speaking at the IIEA, 17 June 2020Introduction123456
11/02/2021Risks, Resilience and Policy Responses to COVID-19 - Deputy Governor Sharon Donneryhttps://www.centralbank.ie/news/article/speeche-risks-resilience-and-policy-responses-to-covid-19-sharon-donnery-17-jun-202/7Thirdly, the very speed of the effect on the economy presents a challenge to policymakers given that key of cialindicators generally come with a lag. A Business Cycle Indicator (BCI) for the Irish economy, developed by the CentralBank, offers more timely assessment. The BCI indicator fell to an unprecedented low in April, almost twice as low as thetrough of the  nancial crisis in 2008/2009.The severity and steepness of the drop suggests that the initial economic effects of the COVID-19 pandemic are worsethan the last crisis. It remains to be seen how these effects persist as the economy slowly reopens, and businesses,workers and policymakers learn to live with COVID-19 over the medium term.Speaking here at the IIEA last year, I pointed to the uncertain path ahead for the Irish economy, the clouds on theexternal horizon, contrasted with potential domestic overheating. Today, uncertainty stems from the path of the virus,the ability of global public health efforts to suppress or manage it, and how these efforts are intrinsically linked to thelevel of economic activity. Looking at a range of forward looking measures, there has been an enormous increase ineconomic uncertainty, greater than that seen in the 2008/2009  nancial crisis.  In this uncertain environment, swift,decisive and credible policy action can provide some certainty.RisksIn the last few months, there has been an abrupt and severe deterioration in the macro- nancial outlook in Ireland. Thecollapse in global economic activity has the potential to trigger long-identi ed risks to  nancial stability.Firstly, this collapse in activity poses risks to  nancial stability through possible defaults.The duration of the shock will largely dictate whether short term liquidity issues will, in turn, become solvency issues forhouseholds, businesses and – by implication – parts of the  nancial sector. In addition, the Central Bank/SCSI propertysurvey reports a median expectation of falls in property price valuations, while the ECB Bank Lending Survey reportsexpectations of reduced demand for some forms of credit.Secondly, in terms of  nancial markets, the shock led to a re-pricing of risk premia, with large falls in risky asset pricesand tighter  nancing conditions globally. Recent research shows that Ireland is particularly sensitive to a tightening inglobal  nancial conditions.Tightening global  nancial conditions have implications for domestic lending, asset prices and economic output.Thirdly, in response to the shock, governments around the world have signi cantly - and necessarily - increasedspending to support their economies. This support has been absolutely necessary to both to support affected households and business and to minimise thelong-term damage of the shock to the economy. However, this also brings risk over the medium term with higher publicdebt levels. Heightened public debt issuance could put pressure on government bond yields in some euro area countries.And while sovereign yields remain low in Europe, this is against a backdrop of an incomplete  nancial architecture.The macro  nancial risks of possible defaults, rising risk premia, tightening  nancial conditions and increased debtburdens are coupled with the structural vulnerabilities we are exposed to as a small open economy. I have spokenpreviously about how our macro indicators tend to have higher highs and lower lows than other countries. 7891011121314151617
11/02/2021Risks, Resilience and Policy Responses to COVID-19 - Deputy Governor Sharon Donneryhttps://www.centralbank.ie/news/article/speeche-risks-resilience-and-policy-responses-to-covid-19-sharon-donnery-17-jun-203/7Our open economy is more sensitive to global developments. The smooth functioning of global value chains, the healthof the US economy and the presence of multinational enterprises (MNEs) in Ireland are all factors that affect Irishoutput and household incomes.Other risks have also not disappeared. The ongoing uncertainty surrounding Brexit negotiations is a serious concern.We will focus on this in our next Quarterly Bulletin, to be published in July. The  nancial stability risks of climate changeand de-globalisation have not gone away. Crystallisation of these risks would further test the resilience of the economyand the wider  nancial system.ResilienceNow let me turn to the resilience of the economy and  nancial system.An important positive is that the starting resilience of households, businesses and the domestic banking system issigni cantly stronger compared to the onset of the 2008/2009  nancial crisis. Since then, Irish banks have beendeleveraging substantially and in recent years the government has been reducing external net debt liabilities. On the eveof the Covid-19 crisis, Ireland’s external balance sheet vulnerabilities were relatively limited. However, on the other hand, the scale of the shock is unprecedented, and we have only seen the initial effects of theeconomic shock. The full implications on households, businesses and the  nancial sector will emerge over the comingmonths and years.  Cash  ow, or liquidity, is the main concern for many businesses. Half of large corporations hold less than 8% of annualturnover in cash.  Half of SMEs hold less cash and SMEs have less access to undrawn credit than their largercounterparts.  While the government stepped in to provide support in the form of wage subsidies and the deferral of taxliabilities, for example, and the banking system provided liquidity via payment breaks and lending, the risk remains ofliquidity turning to solvency issues.As with all facets of this crisis, the extent will depend on the path and duration of the virus. As the severity and scarringwill differ across sectors and regions, careful analysis and subsequently targeted policy will be critical. Households are in a much better  nancial position than on the eve of the 2008/2009 crisis. Their debt burdens arelower, the ability to service their debt is higher, and they are more resilient to falls in house prices. Payment breaks have provided some breathing space for those hardest hit – and is a key way in which the bankingsystem is easing liquidity strains in the household sector. However, some borrowers may continue to experiencedif culties when their payment breaks expire. In such cases, the Central Bank expects lenders to ensure appropriatesolutions, including forbearance, are available. We expect lenders to engage with borrowers well in advance of theexpiry of the payment break to support customers, and our existing arrears handling frameworks, including thestatutory Code of Conduct on Mortgage Arrears (CCMA), will apply in the normal manner. Those frameworks aredesigned to protect the interests of borrowers, particularly in times where they are experience  nancial dif cultiesbecause of illness or loss of income. They require all lenders to engage sympathetically and positively with thecustomers, with the objective at all times of supporting them through this time. We are carefully supervising this processto ensure our expectations are being met.  181920212223
11/02/2021Risks, Resilience and Policy Responses to COVID-19 - Deputy Governor Sharon Donneryhttps://www.centralbank.ie/news/article/speeche-risks-resilience-and-policy-responses-to-covid-19-sharon-donnery-17-jun-204/7The resilience of borrowers is of course intertwined with that of the lenders. Banking crises cast the longest shadow,especially those fuelled by credit. Avoiding such a scenario is therefore paramount.  As lenders can ease or amplify aneconomic crisis, their resilience is central to minimise potential scarring.Through the steps taken in recent years, the domestic banks are now more resilient today than they were in the past.The capital requirements imposed on banks have ensured that they are better prepared for economic shocks such as theone we now face.In addition, the lending practices of the domestic banks have been more prudent in recent years than in the run-up to the nancial crisis and they are also able to rely on capital buffers to absorb losses and continue to lend to the economy.  The banks do, however, have signi cant exposures to the sectors most affected by COVID-19, and their pro tability hadfallen in the run-up to the pandemic. In other words, the resilience of the banks is not unlimited. The banking system is expected to make losses, the scale ofwhich will depend on the evolution of the virus and the scarring effects of this crisis.Beyond domestic resilience, the interconnections of the  nancial system in a time of global crisis will also have a bearing.The investment fund sector globally saw large redemptions in March, and the subsequent “dash for cash” - especiallydollars - put signi cant pressure on other markets, markets that had previously been seen as safe and liquid. Thistightening of global  nancial conditions was partly mitigated by central bank interventions.Over time, the question over the extent to which structural vulnerabilities from liquidity mismatches and leverage in theglobal funds sector contributed to market disruption will need to be addressed. Policy ResponsesNow let me turn to the policy responses, both domestic and global. Over the last three months, we have seen a range of scal, monetary, macroprudential and microprudential actions. These policies have been designed to supporthouseholds and businesses through the crisis, and so that the  nancial system can best absorb and not amplify theshock.Governments world-wide have introduced  scal policy, with common features being household income supports,business loans and guarantees. While  scal policy is crucial to ease the effects of the crisis, monetary policy can ensurethe cost of borrowing remains low. In understanding the important differences between these two policy spheres, theChairman Powell of the Federal Reserve captured it well when saying that the “FED has lending powers not spendingpowers”. Central banks have conducted monetary policy to maintain liquidity in the  nancial system, to support the  ow of creditto the real economy and prevent a tightening of  nancing conditions. Central to our pursuit of price stability, the currentaim of monetary policy is to help ensure the continued supply of credit to the economy through the crisis and to aid itsrecovery from the shock. As a member of the Eurosystem, the Central Bank of Ireland has been central to the ECBresponse. As I mentioned earlier, the resilience of the banking system has been enhanced over the last decade. Macro and microprudential polices have resulted in increased capital and liquidity buffers, to be used precisely in a crisis like this. To echomy colleague Sir Jon Cunliffe of the Bank of England, “while building resilience in the  nancial system in good times242526
11/02/2021Risks, Resilience and Policy Responses to COVID-19 - Deputy Governor Sharon Donneryhttps://www.centralbank.ie/news/article/speeche-risks-resilience-and-policy-responses-to-covid-19-sharon-donnery-17-jun-205/7might seem expensive, it is the better economic bet over the long run”. In March, the Central Bank of Ireland reduced the counter cyclical capital buffer (CCYB) from 1% to 0%. The releasefreed up approximately €940 million of capital across the domestically relevant banking sector.  The OS-II buffer canalso be used to absorb losses in times of stress. Consistent with the EBA guidelines, the Central Bank has been clear thatcredit institutions should not pay dividends for the  nancial years 2019 and 2020 until at least 1 October 2020 andshould refrain from share buy-backs aimed at remunerating shareholders. The mortgage measures have built both bank and borrower resilience since their introduction in 2015, the bene ts ofwhich are evident in a period of stress like this. Today, over one quarter of the stock of lending is in scope of themeasures.  The measures have two objectives to strengthen bank and borrower resilience to negative economic and nancial shocks and they are designed to prevent a re-emergence of a credit price spiral.All these measures aim to reduce the risk of a credit crunch, it is in the interest of borrowers and lenders alike tomaintain the supply of credit in a sustainable manner. Former Governor Lane, and now ECB Executive Board member,Philip Lane noted last week that the ECB is “determined to make sure that this crisis is not made worse by an avoidablecredit crunch”. ConclusionRe ecting the words and actions of central banks and regulators all around the world, in the Central Bank of Ireland weare working to ensure that  nancial system can best absorb and not amplify the fallout from the pandemic.As the initial effects of this exceptional economic shock have materialised, the banking and  nancial system haswithstood the initial pressures. The system has bene tted signi cantly from the painstaking and globally coordinatedeffort by policymakers and regulators to build up resilience over the last decade.On the eve of the crisis, the  nancial system was stronger than a decade ago, but its resilience is not limitless, and itscontinued stability is being heavily supported by policymakers worldwide. The full effects of this crisis will emerge overtime as the damage and scarring to sectors is realised, and the extent depends on the path, persistence and waves of thevirus and the necessary public health responses.---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------1.  I would like to thank Caroline Mehigan for her assistance in preparing my remarks.2. , June 2020, World Bank. 3. , Volume 2020 Issue 1, June, OECD4. World Bank, 2009 GDP growth (annual).  5. International Monetary Fund, “”, May 20, 2020. 6. CSO,  and 2728293031Global Economic ProspectsOECD Economic OutlookThe IMF's Response to COVID-19Monthly Unemployment Data (February)COVID-19 Adjusted Monthly Unemployment Rate (May)
11/02/2021Risks, Resilience and Policy Responses to COVID-19 - Deputy Governor Sharon Donneryhttps://www.centralbank.ie/news/article/speeche-risks-resilience-and-policy-responses-to-covid-19-sharon-donnery-17-jun-206/77. The Central Bank has published additional real time data indicators, on credit demand, job postings and daily spendingpatterns to assist in the analysis of the economic effects of the pandemic. 8. Conefrey, T. & G. Walsh “Measuring Economic Activity in Real Time during COVID-19” Central Bank of Ireland,Economic Letter Vol. 2020, No. 7. 9. Donnery, Sharon (2019) “A Tale of Two Tails, Risks and Resilience in Uncertain Times”, Speech delivered to theInstitute of International & European Affairs, 8th March 2019.  10. Baker, S., Bloom, N., Davis, S., & S. Terry. “”, VOX CEPRPolicy Portal, posted 13 April 2020.  11. Financial Stability Review 2020:1, Central Bank of Ireland. 12. See for example: Byrne, S., Holton, S. & C. Parle “COVID-19 Bank Credit Conditions and Monetary Policy Reference”Central Bank of Ireland, Economic Letter Vol. 2020, No. 5.; McElligot, R., Sherman, M. & M. Woods “Has DemandChanged for New Loans Changed During the COVID-19 Crisis”, Central Bank of Ireland, Behind the Data 2020, &Central Bank/ SCSI Property Survey. 13. Financial Stability Review 2020:1, Central Bank of Ireland. 14. See: Emter, L. “Global  nancial conditions and downside risks to growth: lessons from past shocks”, Box 1, FinancialStability Review, 2020:1, Central Bank of Ireland; Beutel, J., Emter, L., Metiu, N., Prieto, E. and Schueler, Y., (2020),“Dilemma or Trilemma? Evidence from the International Transmission of US Financial Shocks to Downside Risks toGrowth”, mimeo, .15. Financial Stability Review 2020:1, Central Bank of Ireland. 16. Ibid. 17. Donnery, Sharon (2019) “Small Open Economies – Vulnerabilities in a Changing World”, speech delivered to theDublin Economics Workshop, 13th September 2019. 18. Ibid. 19. Galstyan, V. & V. Herzberg “External Balance Sheet Risks in Ireland – Part II”, Central Bank of Ireland, FinancialStability Notes, Vol 2020, No. 4.20. Financial Stability Review 2020:1, Central Bank of Ireland.21. Quarterly Bulletin Q2, 2020, Central Bank of Ireland. 22. Financial Stability Review 2020:1, Central Bank of Ireland.COVID-induced economic uncertainty and its consequencesavailable at SSRN
11/02/2021Risks, Resilience and Policy Responses to COVID-19 - Deputy Governor Sharon Donneryhttps://www.centralbank.ie/news/article/speeche-risks-resilience-and-policy-responses-to-covid-19-sharon-donnery-17-jun-207/723.See  8 June 2020, Central Banks Expectations for Payment Breaks in Banks and Other Lenders. 24.See: Laeven, M.L. and Valencia, M.F., 2018. “Systemic banking crises revisited”, International Monetary Fund, alsoJordà, Ò., Schularick, M. and Taylor, A.M., 2013. “When credit bites back”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 45(s2),pp.3-28.25.Powell, Jerome. H. “” speech at the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy, TheBrookings Institution, Washington, D.C., 09 April, 2020. 26.Holton, S., Stuart, R. & G. Phelan “” Central Bank of Ireland,Economic Letters, Vol 2020, No. 2.27.Cunliffe, John “”, speech delivered to Investment AssociationWebinar, London, Tuesday 9 June 2020. 28.Denora, G., O’Brien, E., & M. O’Brien, “Releasing the CCyB to Support the Economy in a Time of Stress”, Central Bankof Ireland, Financial Stability Notes, Vol 2020.  No. 1.29.See Central Bank of Ireland communication here and the ECB guidance . 30.Ibid.31.Lane, Philp. R., , 11 June 2020. Dear CEO LetterCovid-19 and the EconomyCOVID-19 Monetary Policy and the Irish EconomyFinancial System Resilience: Lessons from a Real StresshereInterview with Il Sole 24 Ore©2021 Central Bank of Ireland
Jerome H Powell: Semiannual Monetary Policy Report to theCongressTestimony by Mr Jerome H Powell, Chair of the Board of Governors of the Federal ReserveSystem, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, WashingtonDC, 16 June 2020.*   *   *Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member Brown, and other members of the Committee, thank you forthe opportunity to present the Federal Reserve’s semiannual Monetary Policy Report.Our country continues to face a difficult and challenging time, as the pandemic is causingtremendous hardship here in the United States and around the world. The coronavirus outbreakis, first and foremost, a public health crisis. The most important response has come from ourhealth-care workers. On behalf of the Federal Reserve, I want to express our sincere gratitude tothese dedicated individuals who put themselves at risk, day after day, in service to others and toour nation.Current Economic Situation and OutlookBeginning in mid-March, economic activity fell at an unprecedented speed in response to theoutbreak of the virus and the measures taken to control its spread. Even after the unexpectedlypositive May employment report, nearly 20 million jobs have been lost on net since February, andthe reported unemployment rate has risen about 10 percentage points, to 13.3 percent. Thedecline in real gross domestic product (GDP) this quarter is likely to be the most severe onrecord. The burden of the downturn has not fallen equally on all Americans. Instead, those leastable to withstand the downturn have been affected most. As discussed in the June MonetaryPolicy Report, low-income households have experienced, by far, the sharpest drop inemployment, while job losses of African Americans, Hispanics, and women have been greaterthan that of other groups. If not contained and reversed, the downturn could further widen gaps ineconomic well-being that the long expansion had made some progress in closing.Recently, some indicators have pointed to a stabilization, and in some areas a modest rebound,in economic activity. With an easing of restrictions on mobility and commerce and the extensionof federal loans and grants, some businesses are opening up, while stimulus checks andunemployment benefits are supporting household incomes and spending. As a result,employment moved higher in May. That said, the levels of output and employment remain farbelow their pre-pandemic levels, and significant uncertainty remains about the timing andstrength of the recovery. Much of that economic uncertainty comes from uncertainty about thepath of the disease and the effects of measures to contain it. Until the public is confident that thedisease is contained, a full recovery is unlikely.Moreover, the longer the downturn lasts, the greater the potential for longer-term damage frompermanent job loss and business closures. Long periods of unemployment can erode workers’skills and hurt their future job prospects. Persistent unemployment can also negate the gainsmade by many disadvantaged Americans during the long expansion and described to us at ourFed Listens events. The pandemic is presenting acute risks to small businesses, as discussedin the Monetary Policy Report. If a small or medium-sized business becomes insolvent becausethe economy recovers too slowly, we lose more than just that business. These businesses arethe heart of our economy and often embody the work of generations.With weak demand and large price declines for some goods and services—such as apparel,gasoline, air travel, and hotels—consumer price inflation has dropped noticeably in recentmonths. But indicators of longer-term inflation expectations have been fairly steady. As output 1 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
stabilizes and the recovery moves ahead, inflation should stabilize and then gradually move backup over time closer to our symmetric 2 percent objective. Inflation is nonetheless likely to remainbelow our objective for some time.Monetary Policy and Federal Reserve Actions to Support the Flow of CreditThe Federal Reserve’s response to this extraordinary period is guided by our mandate topromote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people, along with ourresponsibilities to promote the stability of the financial system. We are committed to using our fullrange of tools to support the economy in this challenging time.In March, we quickly lowered our policy interest rate to near zero, reflecting the effects of COVID-19 on economic activity, employment, and inflation, and the heightened risks to the outlook. Weexpect to maintain interest rates at this level until we are confident that the economy hasweathered recent events and is on track to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stabilitygoals.We have also been taking broad and forceful actions to support the flow of credit in the economy.Since March, we have been purchasing sizable quantities of Treasury securities and agencymortgage-backed securities in order to support the smooth functioning of these markets, whichare vital to the flow of credit in the economy. As described in the June Monetary Policy Report,these purchases have helped restore orderly market conditions and have fostered moreaccommodative financial conditions. As market functioning has improved since the strainsexperienced in March, we have gradually reduced the pace of these purchases. To sustainsmooth market functioning and thereby foster the effective transmission of monetary policy tobroader financial conditions, we will increase our holdings of Treasury securities and agencymortgage-backed securities over coming months at least at the current pace. We will closelymonitor developments and are prepared to adjust our plans as appropriate to support our goals.To provide stability to the financial system and support the flow of credit to households,businesses, and state and local governments, the Federal Reserve, with the approval of theSecretary of the Treasury, established 11 credit and liquidity facilities under section 13(3) of theFederal Reserve Act. The June Monetary Policy Report provides details on these facilities, whichfall into two categories: stabilizing short-term funding markets and providing more-direct supportfor credit across the economy.To help stabilize short-term funding markets, the Federal Reserve set up the Commercial PaperFunding Facility and the Money Market Liquidity Facility to stem rapid outflows from prime moneymarket funds. The Fed also established the Primary Dealer Credit Facility, which provides loansagainst good collateral to primary dealers that are critical intermediaries in short-term fundingmarkets.To more directly support the flow of credit to households, businesses, and state and localgovernments, the Federal Reserve established a number of facilities. To support the smallbusiness sector, we established the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility to bolster theeffectiveness of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act’s (CARES Act)Paycheck Protection Program. Our Main Street Lending Program, which we are in the processof launching, supports lending to both small and midsized businesses. The Term Asset-BackedSecurities Loan Facility supports lending to both businesses and consumers. To support theemployment and spending of investment-grade businesses, we established two corporate creditfacilities. And to help U.S. state and local governments manage cash flow pressures and servetheir communities, we set up the Municipal Liquidity Facility.The tools that the Federal Reserve is using under its 13(3) authority are appropriately reservedfor times of emergency. When this crisis is behind us, we will put them away. The JuneMonetary Policy Report reviews the implications of these tools for the Federal Reserve’s 2 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
balance sheet.Many of these facilities have been supported by funding from the CARES Act. We will bedisclosing, on a monthly basis, names and details of participants in each such facility; amountsborrowed and interest rate charged; and overall costs, revenues, and fees for each facility. Weembrace our responsibility to the American people to be as transparent as possible, and weappreciate that the need for transparency is heightened when we are called upon to use ouremergency powers.We recognize that our actions are only part of a broader public-sector response. Congress’spassage of the CARES Act was critical in enabling the Federal Reserve and the TreasuryDepartment to establish many of the lending programs. The CARES Act and other legislationprovide direct help to people, businesses, and communities. This direct support can make acritical difference not just in helping families and businesses in a time of need, but also in limitinglong-lasting damage to our economy.I want to end by acknowledging the tragic events that have again put a spotlight on the pain ofracial injustice in this country. The Federal Reserve serves the entire nation. We operate in, andare part of, many of the communities across the country where Americans are grappling withand expressing themselves on issues of racial equality. I speak for my colleagues throughout theFederal Reserve System when I say, there is no place at the Federal Reserve for racism andthere should be no place for it in our society. Everyone deserves the opportunity to participatefully in our society and in our economy.We understand that the work of the Federal Reserve touches communities, families, andbusinesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We arecommitted to using our full range of tools to support the economy and to help assure that therecovery from this difficult period will be as robust as possible.Thank you. I am happy to take your questions. 3 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
Christine Lagarde: The path out of uncertaintyRemarks (via videoconference) by Ms Christine Lagarde, President of the European CentralBank, at the inaugural session of the Italian National Consultation, 13 June 2020.*   *   *There is no doubt that the economic situation we face today is characterised by profounduncertainty. Looking into the future has rarely been harder.But, as Abraham Lincoln said, “the best way to predict your future is to create it”. And this is thetheme that I want to emphasise in my remarks today.Obviously there are some major unknowns that we cannot do much about, such as possiblesecond waves of the virus or when exactly vaccines will arrive. But there are steps we can taketo help navigate out of the fog of uncertainty.Most importantly, we need to elaborate and propose a reliable compass – that is, a positive visionof what our economy will look like after.Our economies are entering an inevitable phase of transformation, but if policymakers candemonstrate that we will emerge together from the crisis stronger – with more agile, moremodern and more equal economies than before – we can ensure a more resilient recovery todayand more sustainable growth in the future.Uncertainty in euro area economyThe crisis is weighing heavily on the euro area economy. Business investment looks to havecollapsed in the first quarter, even more strongly than GDP. Measures of consumers’ propensityto save have surged to historical levels, far above what we saw after the Lehman crash.Some of this reflects “forced saving” because people have been unable to spend and willtherefore reverse naturally. But we are also seeing significant precautionary saving, which is asign that households are preparing for an uncertain future, and uncertainty is likewise a key factorin weak business investment.There are two main sources of uncertainty today.The first source is uncertainty about how the economy will recover from the coronavirus (COVID-19), which is evident in the Eurosystem’s latest macroeconomic projections.Our baseline projection sees GDP falling by 8.7% this year, but this is surrounded by a widerange of potential scenarios. In our mild scenario, the drop in GDP would be 5.9% this year, andin our severe scenario it would be 12.6%. In this latter case, output would still be well below itspre-crisis level at the end of 2022.Faced with such an outlook, it is understandable that households are anxious about their futureincomes and firms are hesitant about making irreversible decisions. In particular, many citizensfear that, in a slow recovery, some jobs will be lost once government support schemes arephased out.This underlines why it is so important that the recovery is properly managed and that theeconomy is adequately stimulated. Confidence in government policies is critical to reducinguncertainty, which is itself a form of stimulus.In fact, results of a survey conducted at the ECB show that households that assess governmentpolicies as adequate have lower uncertainty about their future income. 1 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
The second source is uncertainty about how the economy will change in response to COVID-19.It is becoming increasingly clear that the crisis will restructure our economies in fundamentalways. In the manufacturing sector, we are likely to see a push to make supply chains moreresilient, which will likely lead to a greater focus on “proximity”, i.e. on-shoring of production andreinforcing of strategic value chains.In the services sectors, by contrast, the pandemic is likely to shift the economy towards more“distancing” via more digitalisation.We are already seeing this transition accelerate as retail trade gravitates towards e-commerce,services that we previously thought were “non-tradeable” start being traded online, and moreremote working becomes possible.As the workplace changes profoundly, it will take time for the new equilibrium in the economy toappear. Some sectors will grow and create more jobs as their reach increases – think ofcommunication or education and training, for example.But other sectors could undergo significant changes if, say, people no longer need to commuteinto work to the same extent, or to make as many business trips or attend as many conferenceswhere they consume hospitality services.This rebalancing should lead to higher investment in intangible capital, but part of the capitalstock related to tangibles could be superseded. If such changes happen too rapidly, they canlead to temporary disruptions in the labour market.So it is natural for people to wonder what the economy will look like in the future and how we willensure sustainable growth. Our task today – if we want to prevent a persistent increase inprecautionary saving and instead to direct such saving towards needed investment – is toprovide them with credible answers.Transitioning to the post-crisis economyDealing with uncertainty about the outlook is the task of stabilisation policies, and here the ECBwill continue to take all necessary steps within our mandate of price stability – for all euro areacitizens in all parts of the euro area.Already our policies have dispelled tail risks in financial markets that could have led to self-reinforcing vicious circles. We are now orienting our measures to ensure that the right financialconditions are in place to support a recovery from the crisis.This was the motivation behind our recent decision to expand our pandemic emergencypurchase programme to €1.35 trillion, coupled with the up to €3 trillion we are making available tobanks that lend to the real economy.But monetary policy cannot address the more profound questions about how the economy willlook in the future. Historical experience suggests that major economic shifts like the one we aregoing through today require government action to foster change and smooth the transition to thenew normal.In particular, governments need to foster innovation by providing the right framework toencourage experimentation and risk-taking in new and growing sectors, and to support thetransition to new jobs for people working in “sunset” sectors.In parallel, they need to ensure that the conditions are in place to direct investment towards thetechnologies and sectors of the future.1 2 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
This requires sufficient financing. The European Commission estimates that the investmentneeds for delivering the digital transformation as well as the green transition will be at least €1.2trillion over the next two years.But in a number of countries – Italy among them – mobilising investment requires above all abusiness-friendly economic environment, with efficient and agile public and private services,adequate physical and digital infrastructures, a well-functioning judicial system and a strongfinancial sector.If such actions are taken, this crisis can engender a period of positive transformation. It offers anopportunity to policymakers to take a decisive step forward towards more inclusive, greener andmore digital growth.A renewed focus on the digital economy, for example, can help break the negative feedback loopwe see in Europe between fragmented markets, low economies of scale and weak investment indigital capacities, which has at times resulted in the knowledge economy in the euro areacontributing only about half as much to productivity growth as in the United States.Greater digitalisation would in turn help accelerate the shift in Europe towards what theeconomist Carlota Perez has termed “smart green growth”, which is not only about renewablesand sustainable goods, but also about innovation in the productivity of resources and the shiftfrom tangibles to intangibles.Europe already hosts the largest eco-innovation and circular economy industry in the world and the euro is the currency of choice for global green bond issuance. In the twentieth century,Europe was also at the forefront of the creation of the welfare state. The crisis today offers apossibility to consolidate and expand our global leadership on the environmental front and tomake it converge with more digital lifestyles – producing a new, more sustainable economicmodel.Finally, the drive to build more resilient supply chains could be the catalyst we need to definitivelycomplete the Single Market. If we are to “de-globalise” while also achieving allocative efficiencyand strategic autonomy, we will have no choice but to make full use of the size and diversity ofour continent-wide economy.So the potential to frame a positive European vision should, I hope, be compelling. TheCommission’s recovery fund proposal is clearly a key building block in delivering on this goal. Butthe European level cannot be expected to do it alone.Crucially, the recovery fund will only reach its full potential if it is firmly rooted in structural reformsconceived and implemented at the national level. We will get a “bigger bang” for each euro spentif countries conduct the structural reforms they need at the same time.As an illustration, ECB research shows that in the event of a common shock hitting all euro areacountries – of the type we have just seen – those with less efficient economic structures can onaverage suffer up to twice the output loss of a country that is at the frontier of institutionalparameters.The Country Specific Recommendations identify further helpful reforms. In Italy’s case, Iunderstand that these recommendations call for, among other things, investing in digitalinfrastructure for education and training, promoting renewable energy production, developing e-business models and modernising public administration.Such reforms – designed and owned by you – are indispensable to capitalise on this moment.234567 3 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
ConclusionI therefore encourage you, as policymakers, not to let this crisis go to waste.My institution, the ECB, will play its part within its mandate. But it is for you to prove to citizensthat our societies will emerge from this transformation stronger and greener.If we are collectively successful, uncertainty will start to turn into confidence, and then a realrecovery can begin.See Anderton, R., Jarvis, V., Labhard, V., Morgan, J., Petroulakis, F. and Vivian, L. (2020), “Virtually everywhere?Digitalisation and the euro area and EU economies: Degree, effects, and key issues”, Occasional Paper Series,ECB, forthcoming.European Commission (2020), “Identifying Europe’s recovery needs”, Staff Working Document, (2020) 98.Anderton et al. (2020), op. cit.Perez, C. and Murray Leach, T. (2018), “A Smart Green ‘European Way of Life’: the Path for Growth, Jobs andWellbeing”, Beyond the Technological Revolution Working Paper, 2018–01.In terms of revenues. See: ec.europa.eu/environment/ecoap/indicators/socio-economic-outcomes_enECB (2020), The international role of the euro, June.Sondermann, D. (2016), “Towards more resilient economies: the role of well-functioning economicstructures”, Working Paper Series, No 1984, ECB, November.1234567 4 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
Isabel Schnabel: The European Central Bank’s policy in the COVID-19 crisis – a medium-term perspectiveRemarks by Ms Isabel Schnabel, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank,at an online seminar hosted by the Florence School of Banking & Finance, Frankfurt am Main, 10June 2020.*   *   *Accompanying slides of the speech.Over the past few weeks, hopes for a short duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and a quickrebound in economic activity have started to fade. Evidence is increasingly pointing towards aprotracted impact of the crisis on both demand and supply conditions in the euro area andbeyond.For central banks, this implies a shift in focus from economic “firefighting” – ensuring orderlymarket functioning and a sufficient provision of liquidity – to dealing with the implications of thecrisis on medium-term inflation. My remarks today will focus on these implications.Based on our most recent Eurosystem staff projections, I will first discuss the risk of COVID-19leaving a deep footprint on growth and inflation in the euro area. Against this background, I willthen describe how we designed and calibrated our policy response, and explain why thepandemic emergency purchase programme (PEPP) remains the appropriate tool to address thecurrent challenges of the crisis in the context of our price stability mandate.The medium-term economic impact of the crisisThe immediate economic fallout from the COVID-19 pandemic has been substantial. In the firstquarter of 2020, euro area GDP declined by 3.6%. In the baseline scenario of the EurosystemJune staff projections, output declines by a staggering 13% quarter-on-quarter in the secondquarter.As lockdown measures are being eased across euro area countries, a cautious recovery inactivity is currently taking place. But adverse effects on household income and production can beexpected to persist for a considerable period of time.Such protracted effects are clearly visible in the most recent Eurosystem staff projections. Giventhe current exceptional degree of uncertainty, these projections were organised around threescenarios that differ with respect to the severity of the economic fallout from the pandemic in theeuro area (see left chart on Slide 2).All scenarios assume that the substantial support from monetary, fiscal and labour marketpolicies is sufficient to avert adverse financial amplification channels.While the severity of the contraction differs substantially across scenarios, none of the threetrajectories is in line with a full recovery of real GDP by the end of 2022 to the levels projected bystaff in March. In the severe scenario, our staff projections suggest that the level of real GDP atthe end of 2022 could remain 9.6% below the March 2020 staff projection path.In effect, both the nature of the shock and the length of the ensuing downturn make it likely thatthe economy will experience important structural shifts.Disentangling the effects of these shifts on demand and supply, and hence on medium-terminflation, is inherently difficult. In the baseline scenario, ECB staff projections predict notabledownward pressure on inflation arising from the much larger shortfall in aggregate demand than 1 / 7BIS central bankers' speeches
supply.As a result, headline inflation is not anticipated to be back on its pre-COVID-19 path by 2022 inthat scenario, and underlying inflation is also expected to remain subdued in the medium term(see right chart on Slide 2).Given the unprecedented impact of the crisis on income and consumption, such disinflationaryeffects are not surprising. But uncertainty around these forecasts is exceptionally large: whilemeasuring economic slack is already a challenge in normal times, it is currently exacerbated bythe highly uncertain effects of the crisis on potential output, both in the short and in the medium tolong run.In the short run, potential output is severely affected by disruptions in global value chains andsocial distancing measures, which constrain the full use of capital. Think of the hairdresser whomay only be able to use half of his or her physical capacity. Such effects may partly offset thenegative effects of weakening demand on inflation even in the short run.In the medium to long run, the impact of the crisis on potential output, and hence on inflation, willcrucially depend on the response of firms and policymakers to the challenges we are currentlyfacing.First, some sectors of the economy may never return to their previous size, requiring a largereallocation of capital and labour, also across borders. Despite some progress in recent years,however, product and labour markets in the euro area still remain too rigid to accommodate therequired shift in resources in a swift manner, risking permanent damage to the economy.Households hit by job losses, for example, could be scarred in terms of income and humancapital. Temporary lay-offs and government-funded short-time work schemes have so farsuccessfully cushioned the impact of the crisis on euro area employment. In fact, theunemployment rate across the largest countries in the euro area would have been much higherin the absence of these programmes (see Slide 3).But uncertainty may weigh on investment and job creation for a long period. And althoughfurlough schemes can mitigate hysteresis effects in labour markets by reducing workerdisplacement, they may also delay the necessary structural adjustments to the crisis.Second, the speed and extent of capital and labour reallocation is likely to differ across euro areaeconomies, depending on the sectoral composition and the quality of labour market institutions.Such differences, if left unaddressed, risk increasing heterogeneity and fragmentation, furthercomplicating the conduct of the common monetary policy.Third, recent events have increased the odds that large cash-rich firms may absorb liquidity-strapped start-ups, thereby curtailing competition, with potentially adverse effects on productivityand welfare. The pandemic could therefore amplify trends in economic concentration that wehave already observed prior to the crisis, particularly in the United States.Fourth, there are risks that COVID-19 will lead to a surge in protectionism reversing the currentpattern of international production. While re-shoring could be the outcome of benign advances inautomation, a general unwinding of global supply chains would jeopardise potential output growthacross the globe.And, finally, financial distress of firms and households will cause the share of banks’ non-performing loans (NPLs) to rise over time, weighing on bank capital and potentially clogging thebank lending channel of monetary policy.Although euro area banks as a whole have entered this crisis in comparatively good shape, the1 2 / 7BIS central bankers' speeches
experience of past crises highlights that vulnerabilities in the banking sector, if not addressedearly enough, may severely slow the pace of recovery and leave long-lasting damage. RecentECB research, for example, suggests that a failure to resolve high levels of NPLs in a timelymanner can slow GDP growth by 1.5 percentage points per year.However, the magnitude of all these effects is far from certain, as is their impact on medium-term inflation.It will critically depend on the extent to which firms and policymakers will use this crisis as anopportunity to overcome weak potential output growth that has held back prosperity andconvergence in the euro area for too long already.The European recovery fund proposal is a promising step in the right direction. By strengtheninginvestment in new and sustainable technologies, the euro area can accelerate its transitiontowards a digitalised and low-carbon economy. The COVID-19 crisis forcefully demonstratesthat digital transformation is not an option, but a must.The medium-term implications of COVID-19 for monetary policyWhen prospects for the economy and inflation are highly uncertain, central banks essentiallyhave to act as risk managers: they need to take action before the risks materialise to shelter theeconomy from further and deeper harm. Tail risks, in particular, may cause the economy to reactin a non-linear and disruptive way.In spite of the receding stress in financial markets, there was therefore unanimous understandingat the June meeting of the ECB’s Governing Council that further strong policy support wasneeded to prevent medium-term inflation from moving further away from our inflation aim ofbelow, but close to, 2%.Two broad decisions had to be taken.The first was the choice of the appropriate instruments. The second was the calibration of theinstruments, taking into account potential side effects.These two decisions are, of course, interrelated. The choice of instruments ultimately hinges onthe assessment of which instruments can address the risks to the outlook most effectively.Instrument effectiveness, however, is often highly state and time dependant.Persistent periods of market stress, for example, may weaken the transmission of changes inour key interest rates. The logic is easy to see: a reduction in short-term risk-free rates typicallyleads yield-oriented investors to rebalance their portfolios towards riskier assets, either along theyield curve or across asset classes.This channel is even more powerful when rates are negative: it sets strong incentives forinvestors to move away from short-term assets so as to ensure non-negative income flows (seeSlide 4).Market stress considerably weakens this portfolio rebalancing channel. And although marketshave calmed gradually, both in the euro area and in the United States, stress indicators remain atan elevated level compared to the pre-crisis period (see Slide 5).In such conditions, two sets of policy measures tend to be most effective: those acting directlyon banks’ funding conditions, and those, such as asset purchases, that alleviate investors’balance-sheet constraints.The bank-based measures materially reduce the potentially adverse impact of tightening market-based funding conditions on lending to firms and households. In the euro area, this risk is real:2 3 / 7BIS central bankers' speeches
banks still face considerably higher refinancing costs in markets than before the crisis, both forsecured and unsecured borrowing.Our targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO III) address this wedge in ourtransmission process at its root. Provided banks maintain their lending to the real economy overthe next year, they can benefit from rates as low as –1%. Given these highly favourableconditions, surveys point to significant take-up for TLTRO III, in the order of € 1.4 trillion.Asset purchases are the second type of support in current stressed market conditions. Theyincrease the risk-absorption capacity of market participants at a time when it is most needed andwhen limits to arbitrage prevent markets from operating efficiently.Empirical evidence corroborates this view. Findings in the literature suggest that the FederalReserve’s large-scale asset purchases during the global financial crisis have had a strongerimpact on both financial conditions and the economy than during less stressed periods (seeSlide 6).In recent months, we have witnessed similar effects in the euro area. The evidence around thePEPP announcement suggests that the normalised impact of a € 500 billion purchase envelopemay be almost twice as large as under our regular asset purchase programme (APP) (see leftchart on Slide 7).In the euro area, however, there is a second dimension that is crucial for the effectiveness ofasset purchases in periods of market stress: geographical fragmentation.At the beginning of the crisis, perceptions of differences in fiscal policy space have widened thewedge between the financing costs of euro area sovereigns, and hence of firms, banks andhouseholds in the single currency area.In such periods of acute market segmentation, asset purchases tend to operate differently: asportfolio rebalancing is weakened, their effects are mostly “local” – that is, specific to the marketsegment where purchases are conducted.In other words, monetary policy needs to act in a more targeted and flexible way to reduce risksof fragmentation. ECB staff estimates show that the dispersion of the impact of PEPP on yieldsacross euro area countries was indeed substantial (see right chart on Slide 7).For these reasons, the Governing Council decided last week that, in the current uncertain marketenvironment, the PEPP remains the best and most effective instrument to respond to theunprecedented challenges that the pandemic poses to the euro area economic outlook.With its inherent flexibility, PEPP is best suited to address the dual objective of counteringfragmentation in the euro area and closing the medium-term inflation gap that has emerged fromthe COVID-19 pandemic, in line with the temporary nature of the programme and its close link tothe “coronavirus COVID-19 crisis phase”.Our regular asset purchase programme (APP) and our interest rate policy, together with ourforward guidance on rates and reinvestment, remain geared towards addressing the weaknessin broad underlying inflation that is unrelated to the outbreak of the coronavirus.In light of these considerations, the Governing Council decided to increase the PEPP purchaseenvelope by an additional € 600 billion to a total of € 1,350 billion and to extend the horizon of netpurchases under the PEPP to at least the end of June 2021, or in any case until the GoverningCouncil judges that the coronavirus crisis phase is over.We also decided to reinvest the maturing principal payments from the securities purchased345 4 / 7BIS central bankers' speeches
under the PEPP until at least the end of 2022.Calibrating PEPPThis brings me to the second question – the calibration of the PEPP.By removing duration risk from the market, PEPP reduces the bond free-float ratio –the share ofbonds that need to be held by private price-sensitive investors relative to total bond supply (seeleft chart on Slide 8).In the absence of our new measures, this ratio would have gradually increased on the back of thelarge coronavirus-induced increase in debt issuance, thereby putting upward pressure on bondyields.The PEPP envelope has been calibrated with a view to restoring and preserving financialconditions that are consistent with bringing inflation back to the pre-COVID-19 inflation path.The evidence speaks for itself. Upon the announcement of the PEPP, and again in response toour actions last week, the euro area GDP-weighted yield curve has shifted downwardmeasurably, and today it is not far from the level we observed before the outbreak of the crisis(see right chart on Slide 8).In view of the historically weak inflation outlook and the already accommodative stance, thequestion arises whether our actions are sufficient and proportionate.In answering this question, the Governing Council assesses whether the benefits of achieving afaster return of inflation to levels closer to 2% outweigh the potentially adverse side effects. Inother words, it assesses how long the “medium term” should be, given current circumstances.In earlier remarks, I argued that in the vicinity of the effective lower bound, attempting to shortenthe horizon by further easing financial conditions carries the risk of shifting the balance of thecosts and benefits of a highly accommodative monetary policy stance by increasing potentialside effects.At the current juncture, an important element in determining the appropriate length of the mediumterm is the risk of second-round effects that may entrench expectations of low inflation andthereby leave permanent scars on the euro area economy.However, this risk is mitigated by the emerging policy response in the euro area. For the firsttime, fiscal and monetary policy in the euro area are starting to act as true complements, therebyreinforcing each other’s effectiveness and paving the way for a sustainable recovery.Moreover, inflation expectations by households currently signal very limited risks of second-roundeffects.While financial markets currently price in significant risks of deflation over the next five years (seeleft chart on Slide 9), households have adjusted their expectations in response to the pandemicvery differently: the share of people that expect inflation to increase more rapidly over the courseof next year has increased markedly in April, from 20% to 36%, and in May still accounted for32% (see right chart on Slide 9).So, given the already highly accommodative monetary policy stance, the growingcomplementarity between fiscal and monetary policy and the high uncertainty regarding second-round effects, our decision appears to be an appropriate and proportional course of action.The dual objective of PEPP6 5 / 7BIS central bankers' speeches
To enhance the effectiveness of our asset purchases, the PEPP has to be operationalised in away that it meets the described dual objective.The PEPP is not an interventionist programme where we stand on the sidelines when conditionsare calm and enter the market only in times of market disturbances.It rather resembles a two-staged pyramid.At the basis, there is a constant flow of purchases that reaches out to all eligible marketsegments. In the sovereign space, these purchases are guided by the ECB’s capital key.This is the “stance” element of PEPP. It seeks to create financial conditions that are consistentwith our inflation aim.The upper part of the pyramid is its flexibility. This element responds to the challenges posed bythe pandemic to market functioning and the smooth transmission of our policy to all parts of theeuro area.The first granular breakdown of our PEPP purchases, published last week, highlights thisparticular aspect of our reaction function.It stresses the three dimensions of flexibility in the PEPP.First, in the sovereign space, monthly purchases in all jurisdictions will exceed the “basis” flow ifwe observe a general tightening of financial conditions across countries, unusually high volatilityor poor liquidity. In this case, we frontload purchases, following the ECB’s capital key.Second, we raise the share of purchases above the capital key in countries facing severe risksof fragmentation.Third, the allocation of our purchases across market segments is also state-contingent. Forexample, the crisis revealed an unprecedented need for short-term liquidity by firms as lockdownmeasures dried up revenue streams.Firms started to heavily draw down bank credit lines, and year-to-date bond issuance activity byeuro area firms is reaching new record levels. At the same time, traditional investors, such asmoney market funds, shifted their asset allocation to the shortest maturities only.In response to these developments, we decided to shift a significant share of our purchases tothe commercial paper market, and to longer tenors, in particular.Today, we see clear evidence of the success of allocating purchases flexibly across marketsegments. Commercial paper rates for non-financial firms have started to stabilise and issuanceat longer tenors is rising, thereby reducing rollover risks and hence uncertainty for firms (seeSlide 10).ConclusionLet me conclude.COVID-19 constitutes an unprecedented shock to the global and euro area economy. By howmuch the crisis will permanently shift economic structures, both within and across countries,remains highly uncertain at the current juncture. But the nature and severity of the shock make itlikely that these shifts will be significant.In this uncertain environment, monetary policy needs to play a proactive stabilising role. It needsto restore and preserve financial conditions that are consistent with a return of inflation to levels 6 / 7BIS central bankers' speeches
closer to 2% over the medium term. The Governing Council’s wide-ranging decisions of lastweek are geared towards this aim.They were based on the assessment that, in the current fragile market environment, the PEPPremains the best, and most effective, instrument to respond to the dual risks of a shortfall ofinflation from our medium-term aim and of fragmentation in the euro area, which threatens thesingleness of our monetary policy.The PEPP’s anatomy provides the flexibility – across time, jurisdictions and market segments –that is needed to effectively counter the specific challenges that COVID-19 poses. This flexibilityis a key element of PEPP and will be maintained throughout its lifetime.Thank you.See, for example, Autor, D. et al. (2017), “The Fall of the Labor Share and the Rise of Superstar Firms”, NBERWorking Paper Series, National Bureau of Economic Research, No 23396, May; and Gutiérrez, G. and Philippon,T. (2017), “Declining Competition and Investment in the U.S.”, NBER Working Paper Series, No 23583, NationalBureau of Economic Research, July.See Ari, A., Chen, S. and Ratnovski, L. (2020), “The dynamics of non-performing loans during banking crises: anew database”, Working Paper Series, No. 2395, ECB.See, for example, Vayanos, D. and J.-Luc Vila (2009), “A Preferred-Habitat Model of the Term Structure of InterestRates”, NBER Working Paper No. 15487. See also Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2011, 2013) andD’Amico and King (2013).Announcement effects are event-specific and may change over time.See ECB (2020), “ECB announces €750 billion Pandemic Emergency Purchase Programme (PEPP)”, 18March.See Schnabel, I. (2020), “How long is the medium term? Monetary policy in a low inflation environment”, speechat the Barclays International Monetary Policy Forum.123456 7 / 7BIS central bankers' speeches
SPEECH  SVERIGES RIKSBANK SE-103 37 Stockholm (Brunkebergstorg 11)  Tel +46 8 787 00 00 Fax +46 8 21 05 31 registratorn@riksbank.se www.riksbank.se  DATE: 10 June 2020  SPEAKER: Governor Stefan Ingves  VENUE: Swedish Economics Association         1 [25]   ---------------------------- *This speech grew out of many long discussions held over the spring of 2020. The opinions expressed are my own. At the same time, I would like to thank David Vestin for his help in writing this speech and Petra Frid for her help with the diagrams. I would also like to thank Mattias Erlandsson, Jesper Hansson, Pernilla Meyersson, Ulf Söderström, Anders Vredin, Frida Fallan, Charlotta Edler, Ann-Leena Mikiver, Cecilia Roos-Isaksson and Marianne Sterner for their valuable comments on the speech and Elizabeth Nilsson, Calum McDonald and Gary Watson for their assistance translating it into English.  The monetary policy toolbox*  The spread of the coronavirus came as an unpleasant surprise to us all. It is now clear that the economic consequences of the pandemic threaten to be both serious and protracted. Most analysts have very weak forecasts for economic developments in the coming quarters, and in some scenarios also for a longer period to come. We are in the midst of an unforeseen economic development that needs to be met with various macroeconomic tools, and the Riksbank has an important role to play here, together with the Government, the Riksdag (Swedish parliament) and other authorities. During the initial phase of the crisis, we Executive Board members have already taken a large number of decisions to support the Swedish economy, and thus contribute to  meeting the targets for economic policy, and I will comment on what we have done in more detail later on. We can note that many of the measures have major consequences for the Riksbank's balance sheet – something that will be a recurring theme in today’s speech. Today I intend to focus primarily on how the “monetary policy toolbox” needs to look to be able to manage future challenges. I will take a longer perspective and discuss which tools the Riksbank may need to use, especially if the low interest rate scenario that has characterised the past 10 years becomes even more prolonged. The fact that monetary policy measures affect a central bank’s balance sheet has become increasingly common in large parts of the world. This development has been driven by the very low interest rates and the need to make monetary policy even more expansionary. Essentially, it is nothing new – if we go back in time, there are many examples of central banks that have used variation in their asset portfolios as a means of conducting monetary policy. The monetary policy toolbox also needs to take into account changes in the financial system; for instance, we in 
       2 [25]  Sweden have, in recent years, seen a development towards a higher share of market financing for Swedish companies. As things look now, there is considerable probability that global interest rates will remain low over a long period of time, and then monetary policy will have to find other ways of working to attain the inflation target than those we are used to, and many of the measures will have consequences for the balance sheet. We need to endeavour to attain a better analysis of how measures that have an effect through the balance sheet affect the economy and become as clear and systematic when we talk about these as we have tried to be with regard to steering interest rates. I intend to begin with a historical retrospective – focusing on the past 30 years – and to describe how monetary policy has developed over time. Then I will move on to the challenges that monetary policy has faced and that have led to the use of new tools. This takes me to the international discussions about the monetary policy toolbox, and, in conclusion, I would like to discuss what opportunities and limitations the Riksbank Inquiry’s proposed new act entails. The development of monetary policy – a retrospective Ever since central banks in the modern sense were created, their objective has been clear: to provide the economy with a payment system and with a means of payment and to ensure that the value of these funds remains stable over time. Central banks have been able to conduct monetary policy to attain their objectives – price stability and a smoothly functioning payment system – by varying the volume of the means of payment or adjusting terms and conditions in their payment systems. The central banks provide liquidity that enables us to make payments smoothly. Gold standard and redeemable money create credibility During the second half of the 19th century, the gold standard was introduced. The meant that the value of a banknote, the means of payment at the time, was directly linked to something real in that the banknotes could be redeemed for gold in the central bank.1 However, fiscal policy tensions as a result of world wars and the economic depression in the United States in the 1930s led to the abolition of the gold standard. In addition, payments markets were developed so that other means of payment than cash gained importance. When the link to gold no longer existed, a new ‘nominal anchor’ was needed. The answer became the central bank’s credibility: a responsible monetary policy aimed at price stability. Over a long period, the gold standard was replaced by a regime with fixed exchange                                                            1 Naturally, this was nothing new: coins with direct precious metal content have been used for thousands of years. But this restored a systematic standard for a direct link between banknotes and gold in large parts of the world, and thus started a period of very stable exchange rates. See Söderberg (2018) for a description of the development of means of payment. 
       3 [25]  rates, where a small number of central banks in practice conducted monetary policy for the entire world and thus ‘lent’ their credibility.2 In Sweden, this system of fixed exchange rates did not function so well and this led to several major devaluations. The larger central banks also lost credibility for various reasons and the global economy underwent a period of high inflation in the 1970s and 1980s. Independent central bank with inflation target replaces gold The global developments over the past 30 years have entailed major changes to the monetary policy landscape, not least in Sweden. During the 1980s, work began in the leading countries of the world economy on rebuilding the confidence in monetary policy that had been lost in the 1970s.3  At the beginning of the 1990s, Sweden experienced a severe financial crisis following the rapid winding up of several decades of hard regulation of the financial markets. During the crisis, there was strong pressure to devaluate and the defence of the fixed exchange rate finally became untenable. When the Riksbank abandoned the fixed exchange rate, monetary policy sought a new way to promote price stability, and Sweden joined the global trend of reinforcing the credibility of monetary policy. The answer became a more independent Riksbank with an explicit inflation target, and Sweden became one of the first countries in the world to try this new path. After a few years of getting used to this new way of conducting monetary policy, there was a long period of relative calm in large parts of the world. Many countries introduced a similar policy that had the more or less explicit target of holding inflation close to 2 per cent. From the middle of the 1990s until 2008, inflation was on average fairly close to the target and developments in the real economy were more stable than before. Blanchard and Simon (2001) were among the first to document this phenomenon, which came to be called the ‘Great Moderation’. But even then, there were discussions of whether the phenomenon was due to structural changes, skilful macroeconomic policy, including monetary policy, or quite simply luck. At the beginning of the 1990s, the Riksbank's balance sheet grew in connection with the foreign currency reserves being reinforced through loans (see Figures 1 and 2). When the fixed exchange rate was abolished, it was decided that there was less need to hold foreign currency reserves for monetary policy purposes and the size of the balance sheet declined fairly rapidly. Between 1994 and 1998, domestic bond positions were sold off and foreign currency loans were repaid.4 Instead, the Riksbank conducted monetary policy with a minimal toolbox in this new environment. The repo rate, which is the base for the lending and deposit rates the Riksbank applies with regard to the commercial banks, was adjusted to ensure monetary policy was well balanced. Weak inflationary pressures and low                                                            2 Over the period 1946-1971, this system, in practice, was very reminiscent of the gold standard, as many countries had fixed exchange rates against the US dollar under the so-called Bretton Woods system and the United States had a link between the dollar and gold; see Jonung (2000). 3 See, for instance, Rogoff (1985). 4 It is difficult to obtain an overall picture of the actual development of the foreign currency reserves, as the Riksbank used different forward transactions as part of its management and these positions are not visible on the balance sheet. 
       4 [25]  resource utilisation led to interest rate cuts and vice versa. Even the reserve requirements that many other central banks around the world still use were set at zero way back in 1994, and have remained unchanged since then. Figure 1: Assets on the Riksbank’s balance sheet 1980-2019  Note. SEK billion. Annual data where the final observation is 2019. The broken line indicates corona-related measures.  Source: The Riksbank  Figure 2: Liabilities on the Riksbank's balance sheet 1980-2019   Note. SEK billion. Annual data where the final observation is 2019. The broken line indicates corona-related measures.  Source: The Riksbank  The communication when the inflation target was introduced was clear and successful – inflation expectations were gradually adapted down to the target of 2 per cent and wage formation functioned well when both employer and employee could assume that average inflation would be close to the target. 
       5 [25]  Steering the interest rates worked well during this period, despite the Riksbank using a very small toolbox when conducting its monetary policy. We went from doing to mostly talking about monetary policy. But the fact that this works is based on the Riksbank having built up credibility on the market and that it is ready to use its balance sheet if market rates were to deviate from the desired levels. On Wall Street there is an expression “Don’t fight the Fed” – which means it is not a good idea to take positions based on the assumption that the central bank will fail to attain the interest rates aimed for. Steering interest rates is also based on the fundamental transmission mechanism functioning – that other interest rates in the economy actually change when the shortest money market rates the Riksbank affects are changed. How well this functions depends on different conditions in the financial sector that can be state-dependent. A similar development took place in many countries during this period – the central bank's job conducting monetary policy was relatively simple. But below the calm surface, two interlinked problems were bubbling up – a trend fall in real interest rates and rising debts. I have talked about these problems on several occasions.5 Falling interest rates Over the past 30 years, interest rates around the world have fallen heavily. This is, of course, partly due to the central banks conducting a monetary policy that has succeeded in bringing down the average level of inflation from the high levels of the 1980s, which has been good. But it is also due to a global development towards lower real interest rates (see Figure 3), something that most say has not had anything to do with monetary policy, but instead is explained by real economic factors.6 Holston, Laubach and Williams (2017) have carried out empirical research into how the ‘equilibrium real interest rate’ has developed in some leading economies, and they find a clear downturn after the financial crisis 2008-2009. Three of the several attempts to explain why real interest rates are now much lower than before are particularly worth mentioning. The first explanation is based on fundamental economic theory, according to which the real interest rate, at least in a closed economy, will be in proportion to growth in the economy, and the latter has slowed down in recent years. The second concerns the ‘global savings glut’, that is that (primarily) the major economies in Asia and the Middle East have generated large trade surpluses and thereby increased demand for savings, which tended to push down interest rates as the supply of safe assets is limited. The third explanation highlights demographic developments. The idea is that an ageing population needs to save for its pension, which once again leads to an increased tendency to save, which in turn pushes down the real interest rate. With today’s integrated capital markets, we will have a global trend with lower real interest rates. An individual country with a floating exchange rate may deviate from this trend in the short term, partly for cyclical reasons and partly                                                            5 Ingves (2019), and Frohm and Ingves (2020). 6 See Lundvall (2020). 
       6 [25]  because global investors may demand a time-varying risk premium to invest there, but in the longer run the real interest rate in a small open economy will follow the global trend downwards. The challenge for monetary policy is that the low real interest rate limits the monetary policy scope to manage a severe recession by cutting the repo rate. The nominal interest rate cannot continue to be cut indefinitely – a negative repo rate makes it increasingly attractive to hold cash. Even if frictions in the banking system make it possible to have a weakly negative repo rate, it is not possible in practice to cut the repo rate indefinitely. The average repo rate is the total of the average real interest rate and the inflation target – the lower the real interest rate is, the lower the average repo rate is and thus there is less scope for interest rate cuts in a recession. Figure 3: Global real interest rates have fallen in the past 25 years   Note. Per cent.  Source: Lundvall (2020). Increased indebtedness Parallel with the fall in real interest rates, indebtedness has increased in Sweden and in many other countries (see Figure 4). In some countries, citizens have become indebted through the state – a national debt of more than 100 per cent of GDP is beginning to be common. In other countries, such as Sweden, the national debt is low, but instead private indebtedness is high. A large part of this development can be explained by lower interest rates. Households’ interest expenditure as a share of their incomes is not so much higher now than before, despite the large rise in debts. The debts have mainly been used to finance housing purchases, and, as the supply of housing has been relatively sluggish (although construction has been high in recent years), housing prices have risen substantially.  But if we can explain part of the increase with low interest rates, does this mean it is not a problem? No, I don't think so. A high level of indebtedness leads to large risks – if interest rates rise, then households will have a much higher interest burden.  
       7 [25]  Monetary policy is conducted to attain an inflation rate close to the target and stable resource utilisation. The problem is that monetary policy has an impact through several different channels, including households’ consumption decisions, the exchange rate and investment. Monetary policy that is well balanced on the basis of inflation and resource utilisation in the economy as a whole can be problematic for a group of households that is highly indebted. In this situation, it is important that the banks and Finansinspektionen ensure that credit granting is sustainable. Moreover, households’ interest rates may rise without the Riksbank raising the repo rate – if problems arise in the banking sector that mean the banks’ financing costs rise. If the global tendencies that have pushed down the real interest rate are reversed, this would most probably push up interest rates in Sweden too. And one should remember that it is easy to increase the debt when the interest rate is low, but more difficult to reduce it when the interest rate is high. Figure 4: Indebtedness as a percentage of GDP   Note. Per cent of GDP.  Source: Statistics Sweden  Almost all major financial crises have been preceded by a large increase in credit volumes.7 There is no consensus on why this is the case, but I believe that increased leverage means increased risks. Moreover, if short market financing becomes more common when credit grows rapidly, the risks linked to banks’ short-term liquidity management increase. The global financial crisis concludes the Great Moderation The dream of a world where fine-tuning monetary policy eliminates cyclical fluctuations and leads to an entirely stable economic development was definitely                                                            7 See, for instance, Jorda et al. (2013). 
       8 [25]  burst by the financial crisis 2008-2009. In the United States, the foundation for the crisis was created when borrowers with weak debt-servicing ability were given the opportunity to take large loans with their homes as collateral. The loans were often sold on to other financial institutions packaged together with other assets, until it was finally difficult to know which financial institutions were exposed to the impaired loans. When the uncertainty spread, it had unexpectedly large effects and repercussions on the entire world economy. Financial crises took place in several countries in the euro area and in the United Kingdom. The world's central banks reacted by implementing powerful measures – a lesson learnt from earlier crises is that the reactions of central banks are decisive for the sequence of events. Many say, for instance, that one of the reasons why the 1930s crisis in the United States became so serious was that the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy was too tight. Although it is difficult to distinguish the purpose of different measures, we can say that the financial crisis roughly entails three different types of problem for the central banks: liquidity problems, problems with market functioning and difficulties managing an unusually deep recession. In addition, a long line of solvency problems arose. The fact that different central banks, to some extent, chose different measures during the phases of the crisis reflects which problems needed to be counteracted at different points in time. Central banks offered liquidity during the crisis The acute liquidity problems arose when unease spread and various actors began to question their counterparts’ creditworthiness. This led to many financial agents having problems obtaining short-term market financing. Many of these agents had a business model based on lending or investing money in the longer term and regularly obtaining financing through different forms of short-term market funding. When access to short-term funding was strangled, there was an overhanging threat of suspension of payments. To counteract this problem, many central banks established different types of ‘facility, where a number of financial institutions could borrow money against various forms of collateral – even those that could not be sold at a reasonable price on the market.  Here we can see that the central bank has an important task to fulfil in a crisis: to take on risk in a time when no one else is willing to do so. In a crisis, there is a risk of a ‘fire sale’ dynamic arising. Institutions that cannot replace their funding are forced to sell off assets, which leads to a fall in prices If the central bank, in this situation, goes in and offers the actors loans with these assets as collateral, and does not fully apply the prevailing market valuation, the market can stabilise. The purpose of the measure is primarily to preserve financial stability by ensuring that the liquidity supply functions. But if the central bank does not support the liquidity supply, there is the threat of a credit crunch and bankruptcies, which will, of course, in turn have macroeconomic effects that impact the monetary policy objectives. It is often difficult to distinguish between what is monetary policy and what is 
       9 [25]  financial stability policy, both in purely practical terms in the current situation, and on a more theoretical level.8 Central banks supported market functioning The next group of problems is related to market functioning. Some markets for important securities can become so uncertain during a severe crisis that no private investor is prepared to buy these assets. Or else the uncertainty on the financial markets can lead to severe fluctuations in the compensation the financial agents require to invest in risky assets (risk premiums). This could in turn threaten the monetary policy transmission mechanism. This type of problem affected the very important US housing bonds during the financial crisis. To avoid a substantial credit crunch for US households, this market needed to keep functioning. During one period, therefore, the Federal Reserve purchased a very large share of the newly issued housing bonds, which had the desired effect – the market stabilised.  Sometimes all it takes is for the central bank to make it clear that it will act if problems arise. The actual signal may then be enough to calm the market. Sometimes a facility will do the job. If the market is worried it will be difficult to temporarily convert an asset into liquidity on private markets (for instance through repos), the central bank’s facility may be sufficient to calm the situation. If this is not enough, the central bank can use direct purchases to compensate for the market’s unwillingness to take risk. We note that it is the possibility to expand a central bank's balance sheet, indirectly or directly, that creates the capacity to calm the situation. Lower bound for repo rate motivated other monetary policy measures The severe recession that arose in many countries in the wake of the financial crisis was initially managed through very large interest rate cuts. But these were not sufficient – resource utilisation was assessed to still be very weak and inflation prospects were low. In this situation, several central banks decided that further measures were needed to make monetary policy more expansionary.  Both the current interest rates and expectations of future interest rates play a role when households and companies make decisions on consumption and investment. One of the first measures taken by many central banks was therefore to communicate the probable development of their policy rate over the coming years, what is known as ‘forward guidance’. Different forms were discussed and tested in different countries. Both unconditional promises (“the policy rate will not be raised for a good 2 years”) and conditional promises (“the policy rate will not be raised until inflation again reaches 2 per cent”) were tested. The Riksbank's own repo rate path can be regarded as a form of forward guidance. Many central banks assessed that policy rate cuts and communication of future action were not sufficient when monetary policy needed to become even more expansionary. They then resorted to a further type of measure, known as                                                            8 See Billi and Vredin (2018) for a discussion. 
       10 [25]  ‘quantitative easing’, which means pushing down long-term market rates on various markets through direct purchases of financial assets. A further measure introduced by both the Bank of England and the ECB was ‘funding-for-lending’ programmes. The idea behind these is that the banks can borrow money at a low cost for the explicit purpose of increasing lending to households and companies. These measures were introduced when a credit crunch threatened to hamper growth. Sweden, as a small open economy, was hit hard via trade with other countries, despite the financial problems in our country being much milder than in many other countries, although there was initial unease over the Swedish banks’ exposures in Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. The repo rate was cut by more than four percentage points to alleviate the effects on the Swedish economy. In addition, several measures were implemented with the purpose of supporting the Swedish financial system. The Riksbank lent SEK 400 billion to Swedish banks and also lent the equivalent of almost SEK 200 billion in foreign currencies to help the Swedish banks with short-term liquidity problems. During 2010, the Swedish economy grew strongly and the Riksbank and many other analysts forecast a global economic upturn and a rapid recovery in the Swedish economy. The Riksbank therefore began its repo rate increases, but was force to back down when it became clear that the global economy was weaker than anticipated. Moreover, long-term inflation expectations fell. In 2015, the interest rate was cut to –0.5 per cent. The Riksbank also bought a large amount of government bonds to further stimulate economic development. The Riksbank has also reinforced the foreign currency reserves to have a better preparedness to give Swedish banks access to foreign currency in a crisis situation. Both of these measures led to the Riksbank's balance sheet becoming much larger than it was before (see Figure 1). The Riksbank's response to the coronavirus At the beginning of 2020, the world once again suffered a global economic crisis, this time in the form of the repercussions of the coronavirus outbreak. The measures taken to reduce the spread of the virus have had very large economic consequences and created a need for support measures from various authorities. The Riksbank’s role in the initial stage of the crisis has been to ensure that there is no lack of liquidity so that lending can continue and we can conduct an expansionary monetary policy to support the economy. We have therefore taken a large number of measures to reduce the economic consequences of the coronavirus pandemic. When it becomes clearer how lasting the crisis is likely to be, it may be appropriate to further adjust the expansiveness of our monetary policy. In recent months, the Riksbank has decided on • A lending programme to the banks of SEK 500 billion to facilitate lending to companies • Purchases of covered bonds for SEK 145 billion  • Purchases of municipal bonds for SEK 30 billion 
       11 [25]  • Purchases of government bonds, in addition to those decided in 2019, of SEK 25 billion • Purchases of commercial paper for SEK 32 billion 9 • Lending of USD 60 billion to the banks • Easing of collateral requirements so the banks can borrow from the Riksbank more easily • Lower interest rate on the lending facility, to 0.2 percentage points above the repo rate (from 0.75 percentage points). • Offering the banks unlimited loans against collateral with a three-month maturity in weekly extraordinary market operations Common to many of these measures is that they lead to significant changes on the Riksbank's balance sheet.  It may also be necessary to adjust the repo rate, although there is not very much scope for interest rate cuts at present. However, the major problem at the moment is not that the interest rate is too high, the risk of a credit crunch is more about the major difficulties faced by many Swedish companies and households. When the banks are to decide to give loans, they must of course consider whether the borrower will be able to repay the loan. But here it is important that we all help to see the whole picture: if all agents just take into account their own short-term interests, there is a risk that the consequences for society as a whole, and thus for all of us, will be unnecessarily large. To increase the incentives to give loans, the Government has allocated several million to share the risk in new lending with the banks. The terms and conditions in this programme will be more decisive for how much the banks lend than those we at the Riksbank decide on. We can offer the banks slightly cheaper financing, but if the unwillingness to lend is based on an assessment that the risk is too high, then other measures are needed. It is then a question of fiscal policy, not monetary policy. The central issue here is that most of the crisis measures have an impact through the Riksbank’s balance sheet instead of the interest rate. Over the past ten years, this type of measure has become increasingly common, both in Sweden and abroad. An important question going forward is to what extent this type of measure will be used to conduct monetary policy in more normal times.  The international discussion of the toolbox An intensive international discussion was already under way before the coronavirus pandemic broke out concerning how the monetary policy framework and toolbox need to be adapted to meet the challenges of the future. Part of this discussion has been marked by a desire or hope for a return to the situation before the financial crisis. But another part focuses on the insight that we may                                                            9 The Riksbank does not normally buy this type of asset, but as early as the 1897 Sveriges Riksbank Act it was proposed that the bank have the power of authority to buy any Swedish bonds at all, in addition to certain foreign government securities. This power of authority has since passed from the 1897 act via the 1934 act to the one from 1988 that currently applies. Along the road, this power of authority has undergone some changes in wording but the essence of it still remains. The Riksbank has the right, for monetary policy purposes, to buy, sell and mediate securities (including corporate bonds), foreign currency and the rights and obligations linked to these assets. 
       12 [25]  have to change how we work in the longer term too. The current situation strengthens this already great need. Below, there follow a number of the proposals raised. Some of them are intended to institutionalise the usage we have already come across in my description of the crisis measures. One key theme of the discussion is the need to have tools able to counteract future recessions in a credible manner. It is also important to be systematic and to describe clearly the conditions under which these tools may be used. With these conditions met, we can achieve better automatic stabilisation of future economic shocks, as the participants in the economy will understand how monetary policy will act going forward and be able to adjust their expectations accordingly. If the private sector instead perceives the scope for monetary policy as being limited or the policy as being hard to grasp, credibility for the inflation target may be jeopardised, particularly in a situation in which these limits are perceived as long-term. Proposals for tools that could be used to provide better possibilities for counteracting a recession include: • Raised inflation target • Make up strategies for better automatic stabilisation of the economy after shocks  • Quantitative easing used systematically in the implementation of monetary policy • Forward guidance • Coordination with fiscal policy under special circumstances • Fiscal policy stimulation measures funded with central bank money, so-called helicopter money • Acceptance of low inflation We shall now examine the arguments behind these proposals. Raised inflation target Firstly, it must be said that the proponents of this idea do not usually mean raising the inflation target in the current situation. Rather, if the inflation target is to be raised, this should be from a normal level, when inflation has been close to the target for some time and monetary policy has become somewhat normalised. The argument for raising the inflation target is that this would increase the average scope for monetary policy in future recessions, as the average nominal interest rate is the sum of the real interest rate and inflation. If the real interest rate falls, the inflation target can, in principle, be raised by as much to restore scope. Does it matter to the economy if the inflation target is two or, say, four per cent? Empirical research has certainly identified a relationship between the level of average inflation and growth, but this relationship is quite weak and primarily seems to be relevant when inflation is relatively high. High inflation also seems to coincide with greater variation around the average level. There is thus a certain support for the view that the inflation target should be fairly low. However, the 
       13 [25]  inflation target’s most important function is to provide the economy with a nominal anchor, for example for wage formation activities to coordinate around. There are practical aspects that must be considered if the inflation target is to be changed. Establishing a new level may require a great deal of work, as it takes time for the participants in the economy to get used to new targets and a change may also lead to the private sector starting to expect further changes of the target later on. There are also open economy aspects to this issue, as it is hardly a coincidence that almost all countries applying some form of inflation targeting policy have chosen an inflation target of almost two per cent. It seems likely that any movement towards a higher inflation target should be the result of an international discussion in which Sweden will hardly be the country to go first. Make up strategies for better automatic stabilisation of shocks Another idea discussed is that of changing the central bank's targets so that a certain measure of history-dependency is built into the monetary policy strategy. For example, the US central bank has initiated a review of its monetary policy framework where one alternative being discussed intensively is a target for average inflation.10 The idea is that the participants in the economy understand that, if a shock to the economy pushes inflation down, the central bank will, in the future, compensate (make up) for this by allowing slightly higher inflation later on. If prices are sluggish, there will not be such great incentive to cut prices as a response to the shock and inflation will therefore become higher. Such a monetary policy strategy could, therefore, theoretically give better automatic stabilisation of shocks and lead to less of a need to adjust the interest rate, something that is particularly interesting when the policy rate is close to its lower bound. Bernanke (2020) has an alternative proposal that is based on this kind of target only being introduced temporarily when monetary policy is limited. However, here too it is important that this is communicated in advance – the measure will then have the maximum effect as it contributes to increasing the central bank's ability to stabilise the economy and thereby affect the participants’ expectations. One counterargument is that, if expectations are instead backward looking, the make-up strategies will lead to unnecessary variations in GDP and interest rates. Our inflation target, which focuses on the day's inflation, is forgiving as old misses are ‘forgotten’. As it is difficult to make inflation forecasts, the outcome for inflation will often deviate a bit from the inflation target and it is important to be clear about this in advance, to avoid giving an incorrect impression of great precision in the Riksbank’s ability to stabilise inflation. Quantitative easing as a permanent part of the monetary policy toolbox Purchases of financial assets have, in various times, been part of the implementation of monetary policy. For example, earlier, the Federal Reserve                                                            10 See Nessén and Vestin (2005) for an academic discussion of this monetary policy strategy. See Clarida (2019) for a discussion in the current US context. 
       14 [25]  used non-remunerated reserves, together with direct purchases or sales of government bonds, to regulate the amount of central bank reserves in the system and thus ensure that the federal funds rate ended up close to the target for the policy rate. How much central bank reserves the private banks had depended, among other things, on how much bank deposits they had on their books, related to the reserve requirements the Federal Reserve applied. The banks’ demand for reserves then determined how much bonds the Fed was obliged to purchase to steer the interest rates to the desired level. This led to the Fed already having a substantial portfolio of government bonds before the financial crisis. Since the level of interest rates in many countries has ended up close to the lower bound, most central banks around the world have made significantly greater purchases of financial assets with the aim of making monetary policy more expansionary.  Longer market rates can be divided up into the sum of future expected short-term interest rates plus a premium. If the markets are not frictionless, the size of this premium may partly depend on the relative supply of a certain bond, which is to say the outstanding stock in the hands of the private sector. If the central bank purchases a significant proportion of the stock, the price of the remaining bonds can therefore rise and interest rates thereby fall. When the Riksbank purchases bonds, liquidity is injected into the market – the investor swaps the bond for deposits in a bank and the amount of central bank reserves in the banking system as a whole increases. How effective quantitative easing is depends on how investors and bankers use this liquidity. The hope is that investors search for new investment possibilities and thereby push down other market rates that are more important for companies and households. When the level of interest rates goes down, the banks can expand their credit granting – the increased liquidity in the central bank can contribute here as it forms a buffer against possible outflows of liquidity that could affect the bank if it creates new loans. There are also other potential effects of quantitative easing such as a reinforcement of the credibility of forward guidance. In Sweden, the Riksbank’s balance sheet has increased heavily and the Riksbank now owns quite a large proportion of outstanding government bonds. Bernanke (2020) is one of those who has argued that quantitative easing has worked, in the sense that it has contributed towards making monetary policy more expansionary. Consequently, it may also become a permanent part of the monetary policy toolbox going forward – at any rate if the level of the real interest rate continues to hold short-term nominal interest rates at the lower bound. Quantifications made at the Riksbank also indicate that purchases of government bonds have had a significant effect.11 However, there is a limit for how much long-term interest rates can be pushed down in Sweden. Partly, this is because the Swedish National Debt Office has a facility that creates possibilities for an arbitrage if the long-term interest rates are sufficiently far below the repo rate. And, partly, it is because some investors may choose to switch to cash if the level of interest rates becomes too low.                                                            11 See, for example, De Rezende and Ristiniemi (2018). 
       15 [25]  If quantitative easing is to be a part of the permanent monetary policy toolbox, it would be an advantage if the instrument could be used more systematically than has been the case during the crisis. Much of the development of the monetary policy analysis has focused on the importance of a systematic approach and communication – and this should also apply to new instruments, again to influence expectations in the outside world as much as possible. In addition, the central banks need to find clear strategies for how they can reduce their holdings of financial assets when economic activity improves and inflation rises, to avoid their balance sheets increasing with each recession. Forward guidance to influence expectations of future interest rates Ever since 2007, the Riksbank has engaged in a form of forward guidance, by publishing, in each Monetary Policy Report, its best assessment of the future development of the repo rate, inflation and the real economy. This is a matter of convincing the market of where we believe the economy and repo rate are heading. Even if it is difficult to make forecasts and we have often believed that interest rates would rise faster than was actually the case, communication about the future has still been useful, particularly over the shorter horizon. We have been able to affect expectations for the following years through our communications. Other central banks that have not traditionally engaged in this type of communication have, as I mentioned earlier, experimented with different forms of rough ‘triggers’ of various kinds. The academic background to the concept is the insight that expectations of future policy rates are at least as important as their current level when it comes to affecting investment and consumption decisions. In normal cases, the central bank is assumed to be able to influence expectations satisfactorily through its systematic monetary policy. But when the policy rate reaches its lower bound, it is possible to communicate an intention to diverge from normal behaviour and keep the rate low for a longer period and thus substitute, to a certain extent, for an immediate policy rate cut. There has been, however, some discussion of how effective such communication actually is, particularly over longer horizons.12 The Riksbank's method provides a more complete picture of how we see the situation and the development of the economy. But other ways of communicating about the future have their advantages. One variant of this is the state-contingent US approach: saying that the policy rate will not be raised until the outcome for inflation has reached 2 per cent.13 In situations where the market does not share the Riksbank’s view of the development of inflation, the US way of communicating can provide more information than inflation and interest rate forecasts. The market can thereby assess itself when interest rates will start to rise. The Riksbank could certainly achieve an equivalent effect by being clear and, through the use of alternative scenarios and systematic monetary policy, making                                                            12 See Del Negro et al. (2015). 13 The Fed introduced this type of state-contingent forward guidance in December 2012 when it was communicated that interest rates would not be raised before unemployment had declined to 6.5 per cent (with inflation expectations anchored); see Bernanke (2020). 
       16 [25]  the market understand how we will react to future surprises. However, it cannot be ruled out that some form of more explicit forward guidance can sometimes be a simpler and more effective way of communicating. Coordinating with fiscal policy at the lower bound In the last 30 years, the division into fiscal policy and monetary policy in Sweden has been quite clear. An independent central bank with inflation targeting has used its interest rate to push the economy, in the short term, in the direction necessary to reach the inflation target: a high interest rate in upswings and a low interest rate in downturns. The fiscal policy contribution to stabilising the economy has primarily been in the form of automatic stabilisers. Fiscal policy has instead mainly focused on distribution policy and structural issues such as creating stable conditions for sustainable growth. The background to this division was the slow decision-making process in fiscal policy and the difficulty in rapidly adjusting to the changed conditions. It was also the insight that there exists a political temptation to use monetary policy in the short term, which risks creating unnecessary fluctuations in the economy. Despite this division, there is always a certain implicit interaction between fiscal and monetary policies.14 When the policy rate is cut, central government interest payments are reduced, which tends to improve the fiscal balance. When the Riksbank purchases government bonds, this leads to reduced costs for new borrowing for longer maturities. And the opposite is also true: when fiscal policy becomes more expansionary, there is increased activity in the economy and, ultimately, inflationary pressures, which thereby influences monetary policy. However, the last two major crises, combined with the low level of interest rates, raise a few difficult questions. Firstly, if normal monetary policy is not enough, is it conceivable that fiscal policy could ‘help out’ more explicitly when necessary, not just with automatic stabilisers (which can be more significant than monetary policy)? In other words, more discretionary measures that require active decisions could be used. 15 Depending on the circumstances, such a ‘coordination’ between fiscal and monetary policy would, of course, be more or less complicated. In a severe economic downturn with very weak resource utilisation, it is natural for the automatic stabilisers to start by themselves and for the discretionary part of fiscal policy, which naturally strives for normal resource utilisation, to become expansionary. The question, however, is whether this takes place to a sufficient extent, given the fiscal policy framework. An interesting – and delicate – question is whether it is possible to expand the coordination monetary and fiscal policies during deep downturns.  Under the present fiscal policy framework, the budget regulations for fiscal policy are one possible obstacle. The regulations were set up to ensure a responsible fiscal policy and avoid a constantly increasing national debt. But perhaps we should have a discussion on how these rules should be applied in a deep                                                            14 There has also been an academic discussion of a more fundamental interaction between fiscal and monetary policy, known as the fiscal theory of the price level; see Leeper (1991) and Sims (2017). 15 See Ubide (2020) for a discussion of the interaction between fiscal policy and monetary policy. 
       17 [25]  downturn and consider whether the scope for discretionary fiscal policy could be linked to the limitations of monetary policy. A mild form of coordination could take place in the form of the Riksbank publishing alternative scenarios in its Monetary Policy Report stating that monetary policy is limited and that, if fiscal policy were to become more expansionary, this would not lead to higher interest rates but only to inflation closer to the target. A stronger form could involve the Riksbank informing the Ministry of Finance that monetary policy needs the assistance of a more expansionary fiscal policy if the inflation target is to be met. Such a communication would be reminiscent of the reverse situation, when the central bank is concerned about fiscal dominance – a situation where an unsustainable fiscal policy makes it impossible for the central bank to restrain inflation – and communicates this.16  Personally, I do not think that an independent monetary policy presumes a total lack of dialogue between the Riksbank and the political system on such matters. The second question concerns the effectiveness of various measures and the risks they entail. For example, assume that the Riksbank can make monetary policy more expansionary by purchasing certain financial assets. This could increase the risks on the Riksbank’s balance sheet considerably and lead to future losses for taxpayers. Assume now that it had been possible to achieve an equivalent effect by means of mild fiscal policy stimulation measures. This would probably be possible in a situation where monetary policy is at its lower bound. The Riksbank would then not have to raise the interest rate as economic activity rises and fiscal policy would thereby become more effective than normal.17 In this case, there should be conditions for holding a discussion over which policy mix would be most appropriate. In addition, Blanchard (2019) makes the point that, if the real interest rate is lower than the growth rate in the economy, the cost for debt-financed public investments will be very low. Real interest payments are below growth, so the ratio of national debt to GDP falls, even if loans are taken for interest payments and the debt is not amortised.  Helicopter money as a means of funding fiscal policy stimulation Another idea brought up is for the central bank to fund a fiscal policy expansion with the banknote presses. It is difficult to find an exact definition of helicopter money, but the important questions concern which part of it is fiscal policy, which part is monetary policy and which part is coordination. The basic idea plays with fire a little: everybody knows that a failed monetary policy in which control has been lost of the banknote presses can easily end in hyperinflation – history gives us several clear examples of this. But in these examples, the initiative usually comes from elsewhere: central government puts pressure on the central bank to fund an expansionary fiscal policy as tax revenues are insufficient and credit arrangements are limited. The discussion today instead concerns a situation where inflation is too low and monetary policy needs the assistance of a more                                                            16 See also Posen (2020) for a discussion of the interest rate peg introduced by the Bank of Japan. 17 See Coenen et al. (2012), who estimate the so-called fiscal policy multiplier with and without a lower bound for the policy rate. 
       18 [25]  expansionary fiscal policy. However, the question is whether it will be possible to generate just enough inflation and then stop, or whether it will be impossible to shut the floodgates once the flow of money has started to reach full force. There are also interesting technicalities that differ from country to country that could be decisive for whether helicopter money could work differently to normal loan-financed fiscal policy stimulation measures. Does the central bank pay interest on central bank reserves and can cash be redeemed against these on a one-to-one basis? If prices do not increase one-to-one with the increase in the banknote volume (electronic or paper), a proportion of the increase in the banknote volume will closely resemble a debt increase, as the Riksbank will pay interest on this in the future.18 Abolishing cash – or manner a negative interest rate on it Another suggestion from the literature focuses on the reason the lower bound for the policy rate exists, namely the existence of a risk-free asset with a return of 0 – cash. If interest rates become negative enough, households (in the case of the banks’ deposit rates) or the banks (in the case of the central bank’s deposit rates) will instead withdraw cash. Consequently, it is not possible to cut the level of interest rates indefinitely. Rogoff (2017), as well as Agrawal and Kimball (2015), have pointed out that if the central bank were to abolish cash entirely, or introduce an exchange rate between cash and central bank reserves, and allow this exchange rate to reflect negative interest rates, the lower bound could be eliminated entirely. But this is not an easy matter – part of the Riksbank's social contract with Sweden’s citizens is to offer the means of payment demanded and many citizens wish to continue to use cash. Accept low inflation One interesting question is that of which measure of inflation a small, open economy should actually have. The Riksbank measures inflation using the CPIF, and this basket includes quite a large element of imported goods, as Sweden is a small, open economy. The question is whether Sweden can have inflation on target if the rest of the world has very low inflation. Or must we accept that inflation is too low? Is it reasonable that the price of domestically produced goods and services is to increase by more than 2 per cent to compensate for imports being cheap?  Yes, I consider such compensation is possible, as the variable exchange rate, in principle, can capture the difference between Swedish inflation and inflation abroad. The real economic conditions determine which relative prices prevail for Swedish and foreign goods. For example, a deterioration of the relative price of Swedish goods could arise through either a fall in Swedish prices or an increase in foreign prices or a combination of these. Selecting an inflation target of two per cent implicitly chooses one of the possible combinations. If we succeed in this, we gain greater scope to manage future economic shocks, compared with if we give up and allow a new level of inflation that is lower than the inflation target to be                                                            18 An interesting academic discussion on helicopter money is taking place; see, for example, Galí (2020). 
       19 [25]  established. After all, in the discussion above, we noted that, if anything, the international discussion revolves around raising the inflation target. A closely related problem is that it has turned out to be difficult to understand the development of inflation recently using the standard theories that form the basis of the monetary policy analysis. The Phillips curve is estimated to be increasingly flat, which is to say that the relationship between real activity and inflation seems to have become weaker.19 Many economists were surprised by inflation not falling further in the financial crisis, when resource utilisation was seen as being very weak. We need a better understanding of how companies actually set their prices and of how their behaviour interacts with the macroeconomy. A great deal of research is currently focusing on studying different types of micro data and hopefully we will have more knowledge of these matters in the period ahead. Appropriate monetary policy requires freedom of action There are many interesting things to think about regarding all of the different suggestions circulating in the discussion. But the focus of this presentation is that some of these measures entail major consequences for the Riksbank’s balance sheet. It is therefore important that the Riksbank has sufficient freedom of action to formulate an appropriate monetary policy. In addition, the risks that the Riksbank may have to bear on its balance sheet mean that we must have financial buffers to ensure sufficient financial independence, a subject to which I shall soon return. The other question I find particularly interesting concerns the possibilities for coordination of fiscal and monetary policy when the policy rate has reached its lower bound. More research is needed here, together with a practical dialogue between central banks and finance ministries on the form of such cooperation. This is, of course, a sensitive matter, as we have the ban on instructions and our independence to consider. But these well-meaning rules cannot be allowed to form an obstacle to conducting an appropriate discussion on the mix of policies that is appropriate in the extreme situations we must consider. The Riksbank Inquiry – opportunities and limitations Over a fifteen-year period, three different inquiries and a proposal referred to the Council on Legislation have considered various changes to the Sveriges Riksbank Act. The most recent inquiry was presented in November.20 The main origin of the two first inquiries was criticism from the ECB of the Riksbank’s financial independence. This matter was raised when the General Council of the Riksbank decided to make two major transfers of profit at the start of the 2000s, which                                                            19 See Andersson et al. (2020) for a discussion. 20 See SOU 2007:51. 2013:9 and SOU 2019:46. 
       20 [25]  clearly demonstrated that decisions on the transfer of profit were being taken by political forces rather than the Executive Board, in contravention of EU law.21 The Riksbank’s financial independence Both of the two earlier inquiries made by Ingrid Bonde and Harry Flam, together with the more recent Riksbank Inquiry, have all been based on the idea that, in normal times, a central bank’s balance sheet should be fairly small. The idea is simple: in normal times, the foreign exchange reserves can be small and monetary policy can be conducted using variations in the policy rate. However, the Riksbank needs to fund its operations without annual allocations from central government and therefore needs to have earnings that, on average, are at least as large as expenditure. The size of equity thus needs to be calibrated so that the return on it, together with any seigniorage from banknotes and coins, is at least as large as expenditure. Under the assumption that the balance sheet is small, very little extra equity is needed to cover extra risks. The problem with this approach is that it assumes that we are returning to the normal state of affairs that prevailed before the financial crisis of 2008-2009. Things are seldom that simple. I believe there is a great likelihood that the low interest rate environment will be part of the monetary policy landscape for the foreseeable future and, given that it took almost 20 years to reach a decision on a new Sveriges Riksbank Act, the new proposal must be robust and able to cope with different conceivable developments going forward. One critical issue concerns the Riksbank's earnings. In this respect, there are two worrying trends. One is that demand for banknotes and coins is falling and the other is that the low level of interest rates is contributing to falling earnings for the Riksbank. If the real interest rate is around zero or even negative (as it has been for most of the last ten years), the proposed funding model will not work at all, as it is based on invested equity generating a positive real return. Consequently, a ‘backstop’ will be needed if this scenario is realised. In our response to the Inquiry, we propose an interest-free reserve requirement as an alternative form of funding for the Riksbank.22 My assessment is that, in the future, we will presumably have to conduct monetary policy in a way that has great consequences for the balance sheet. The Inquiry's proposals certainly allow purchases of government bonds but, if the Riksbank needs a large balance sheet for monetary policy purposes, we will also have to consider the consequent loss risks and will therefore need a safety margin in our equity to secure satisfactory financial independence. This discussion of equity is partly new, as central banks have previously been protected from losses by large seigniorages. However, along with a few other of the world’s central banks, the Riksbank is facing a new situation in that demand for cash is now so low that seigniorage is only just enough to fund running costs.                                                            21 For historical reasons, this also applies to several of the countries in the Eurosystem. 22 The Bank of England is funded in this manner. In addition, the amount is adjusted so that the Bank of England's revenues are satisfactory regardless of the level of interest rates, at any rate as long as longer government bond yields are positive. 
       21 [25]  In addition, the earlier periods in which central banks have expanded their balance sheets have been fairly brief. If we are now instead facing a future in which the size of the balance sheet, even in normal times, can be expected to be larger than before, the framework surrounding our financial independence will have to reflect that. This means that the amount of equity needs to be proportional to the risks that the Riksbank may have to hold on its balance sheet.23 The basic idea is that the probability that the Riksbank will have to ask the Riksdag for a recapitalisation should be satisfactorily low – only in this case can we say that we are financially independent. In addition to earnings, equity must generate a reasonable surplus so that the Riksbank has profits that can be used to build up equity in the event of losses. The Inquiry’s proposals restrict the Riksbank's equity to SEK 60 billion, calculated only using inflation. As I have said, one interpretation of this is that the Inquiry sees a return to a steady state in which the balance sheet should be small – and, in such a world, a small amount of equity is adequate, assuming that the real interest rate returns to at least 1 per cent and that adjustments to the repo rate are enough to achieve the monetary policy objectives. The proposed act certainly makes it possible for the Riksbank to ask to raise the capital ratio, for example if seigniorage should fall or the real interest rate become lower. The problem is that, if the earnings capacity is initially set to just cover expenditure, there will be no scope to use the profit to build up equity independently. If revenues fall because real interest rates are low, it will not matter if target equity is higher – the Riksbank will make losses until the framework triggers a recapitalisation. When it comes to allowing for a larger balance sheet, the problem is that risks can increase quite quickly – and then, the Riksbank could find itself in a situation where retained profits are not enough to build equity up quickly enough. The conclusion is that there must also be a certain buffer to ensure, in advance, that the size of the balance sheet can expand if new challenges require it. Otherwise, monetary policy will risk becoming restricted in the future. Once again: this illustrates that the Riksbank needs the flexibility to be able to use the balance sheet if this is necessary to conduct a well-balanced monetary policy. Restrictions to the monetary policy toolbox are not appropriate The Inquiry advocates a separation of the tools for monetary policy and financial stability. I have already mentioned that I believe that this separation will be difficult to implement in many cases – all measures are taken for reasons that are ultimately a matter of caring for the macroeconomy and the monetary policy objectives. 24 The central bank's balance sheet is its toolbox. Dividing the toolbox into different compartments where certain tools can only be used for certain purposes would conflict with how economic theory and practical policy have traditionally regarded central bank activities and this could mean a restriction of monetary policy. Internationally, the boundaries between monetary policy and                                                            23 See Kjellberg and Vestin (2019) and the Riksbank’s consultation response, Sveriges Riksbank (2020). 24 See Sveriges Riksbank (2020) and Vredin (2019) for a critical discussion of this demarcation. 
       22 [25]  financial stability are increasingly being erased, while we in Sweden risk getting a law that makes it very difficult for the Riksbank to use its entire balance sheet to conduct monetary policy. I maintain that all the measures taken during the pandemic include elements of both monetary policy and financial stability. Sweden has been a member of the EU for a long time and, like other Swedish authorities, the Riksbank must somehow relate to what happens and what applies in the EU. Other central banks in the EU have the right to far-reaching purchases of various securities for monetary policy purposes. It would therefore be strange to have national legislation giving the Riksbank a markedly different toolbox to what could be argued is the standard in the EU. In addition, the Inquiry’s proposals mean that certain measures may only be adopted under extraordinary circumstances. Such proposals are in sharp contrast to the flexibility central banks have needed to show over the last ten–fifteen years to manage shocks that few could have predicted. One critical issue concerns how much we believe (or fear) that the balance sheet will also have to be used under more normal circumstances in the period ahead. As I am one of those who believes there is a great probability that this will be the case, and who does not see the point of giving monetary policy a narrower interpretation than has been normal from a historical perspective, I do not consider it reasonable to introduce the type of restrictions that the Inquiry advocates. Accessible foreign exchange reserves provide security in crises  As regards the matter of an appropriate size for the foreign exchange reserves, I have two comments. The first of these is that size must be determined by the banking system’s size and funding structure. It is therefore inappropriate to confirm a specific figure by law, as it is very difficult to make an accurate forecast of how the banking system and financial markets will develop over the coming decades.  My second point concerns whether foreign exchange should be held in advance or borrowed when problems arise. One advantage of having small foreign exchange reserves is that the running costs for them will be very small. If you believe that foreign exchange can always be borrowed when necessary, there is good reason to only have small foreign exchange reserves. But I have been involved in managing a number of banking crises around the world and one lesson I have learned from that work is how rapidly a developing crisis can worsen when foreign exchange reserves are not easily accessible. Neither do I believe that it will be so easy to borrow foreign exchange fast enough in all conceivable scenarios and therefore consider it important that the possibility of holding well-balanced foreign exchange reserves is not restricted. Sufficiently large foreign exchange reserves also send an important signal to the rest of the world that we are ready to manage problems should any arise. Furthermore, it is always the lender who sets the terms, at the same time as lending preferably takes place to those who do not need to borrow. I thus consider that it should be the Riksbank that decides the size of the foreign exchange reserves, as well as how they should be funded. In crises and times of unease, the Riksbank must always consider all the 
       23 [25]  possibilities for performing its remit. If there are no other possibilities for the Riksbank to secure access to foreign exchange other than issuing promissory notes in foreign currency in its own name, then such a measure must, of course, be considered and, indeed, implemented when circumstances demand it. A central bank must be able to use its balance sheet I have returned to the central bank’s balance sheet several times, This is because I consider there is a great probability that this will play an important role in monetary policy in the period ahead, just as it did earlier, at least if we are prepared to look further back in time than the Great Moderation. In addition, if real interest rates continue to remain on the weak levels we have seen over the last ten years, changes in the terms for the monetary policy facilities and securities purchases will become necessary parts of normal monetary policy. It is therefore important that the new Sveriges Riksbank Act does not restrict these possibilities. References Agrawal, R. and M. Kimball (2015), “Breaking Through the Lower Bound”, IMF Working Paper No. 15/2015. Andersson, B., M. Jonsson and H. Lundvall (2020), “The new macroeconomic environment after the global financial crisis”, Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review 2020:1, Sveriges Riksbank. Bartsch, E., J. Boivin, S. Fisher and P. Hildebrand (2019), “Dealing with the next downturn”, SUERF policy note Issue No. 105. Bernanke, B. (2020), “The new tools of monetary policy”, American Economic Association Presidential Address”, Brookings Institution. Billi, R. and A. Vredin (2014), “Monetary policy and financial stability – a simple story,” Economic Review 2018:2, Sveriges Riksbank.  Blanchard, O., and J. Simon (2001). “The Long and Large Decline in U.S. Output Volatility”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, pp. 135-64. Blanchard, O. (2019), “Public debt and low interest rates”, American Economic Review 109(4): 1197-1229. Clarida, R. (2019), “The Federal Reserve’s Review of Its Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices”, speech, 26th September. Coenen, G., C. Erceg, C. Freedman, D. Furceri, M. Kumhof, R. Lalonde, D. Laxton, J, Lindé, A. Mourougane, D. Muir, S. Mursula, C. de Resende, J. Roberts, W. Roeger, S. Snudden, M. Trabandt, and J. Veld. (2012), “Effects of fiscal stimulus in structural models”, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4(1) pp. 22-68. 
       24 [25]  De Rezende, R. and A. Ristiniemi (2018), “A shadow rate without a lower bound constraint”, Working Paper Series No. 355, Sveriges Riksbank. Del Negro, M., M. Giannoni and C. Patterson (2015), “The Forward Guidance Puzzle”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports 2012:574.   Frohm, E. and S. Ingves (2020) “The future isn’t what it used to be – perspectives on changes in the Swedish economy”, Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review 2020:1, Sveriges Riksbank.  Gali, J (2020), “The Effects of a Money-Financed Fiscal Stimulus”, Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming Holston, K., T. Laubach and J. Williams (2017), “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants,” Journal of International Economics 108, supplement 1 (May): pp. 39–75. Ingves, S. (2019), “Long-term trends - important pieces of the monetary policy analysis”, speech, Swedish Economics Association, 7 May. Jordà O., M. Schularick and A. Taylor (2013), “When Credit Bites Back”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 45, pp. 3–28.  Jordà, O., K. Knoll, D. Kuvshinov, M. Schularick and A. Taylor (2019), “The rate of return on everything, 1870–2015”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 134, no. 3. Jonung, L. (2000), “Från guldmyntfot till svenskt inflationsmål – svensk stabiliseringspolitik under det 20:e seklet” (From gold standard to Swedish inflation target – Swedish stabilisation policy in the 20th Century), Ekonomisk Debatt 28:1. Leeper, E. (1991), “Equilibria under ‘active’ and ‘passive’ monetary and fiscal policies”, Journal of Monetary Economics, Elsevier, vol. 27(1), pp 129-147. Lundvall, H. (2020) “What is driving the global trend towards lower real interest rates?”, Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review 2020:1, Sveriges Riksbank. King, M. and D. Low, (2014), “Measuring the ‘world’ real interest rate”, Working Paper no. 19887, National Bureau of Economic Research.  Kjellberg, D. and D. Vestin (2019) “The Riksbank’s balance sheet and financial independence”, Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review 2019:2, Sveriges Riksbank.  Nessén, M. and D. Vestin (2005), “Average Inflation Targeting”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 37, pp. 837-863. Posen, A. (2020), “Bank of Japan’s policies have been a success”, Nikkei Asian Review, March 6. Rogoff, K. (1985), “The Optimal Degree of Commitment to an Intermediate Monetary Target.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 100, pp. 1169-1189. Rogoff, K. (2017), “The curse of cash”. Princeton University Press. Sims, C. (2016), “Fiscal policy, monetary policy and central bank independence”, Jackson Hole Symposium. 
       25 [25]  SOU 2007:51, “Riksbankens finansiella oberoende” (The Riksbank’s financial independence). SOU 2013:9, “Riksbankens finansiella oberoende och balansräkning” (The Riksbank’s financial independence and balance sheet). SOU 2019:46, “A new Sveriges Riksbank Act”. Sveriges Riksbank (2020a), “Monetary Policy Report”, April. Sveriges Riksbank (2020b), “Consultation response, SOU 2019:46”. Söderberg, G. (2018), “What is money and what type of money would an e-krona be?”, Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review 2018:2, Sveriges Riksbank. Ubide A. (2020), “Euro yearbook”. Vredin, A. (2019), “Särskilt yttrande av kommitténs sakkunnige Anders Vredin” (Special comment by the committee's expert adviser Anders Vredin), SOU 2019:46, pp. 1898-1908.   
Harvesh Seegolam: Measures of the Covid-19 Support Programmeand setting up of the Mauritius Investment CorporationStatement by Mr Harvesh Seegolam, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, to the press, Port Louis,29 May 2020.*   *   *Friends from the media, Ladies and Gentlemen, Good Afternoon. Welcome to this pressconference.I will provide you with an insight on the current economic situation and also elaborate on thelatest measures which the Bank has announced under its ongoing Covid-19 SupportProgramme.Let me at the very outset give you an overview on where the global economy stands.What we are experiencing today are unprecedented economic conditions. Major companiesaround the world have shown worrying signs of distress leading to rapid job losses. The ensuingimplications on financial stability are serious.I must emphasise that there is still substantial uncertainty on how the pandemic will evolve andwhat will be the ultimate impact on economies.As you are aware the world continues to face an unmatched crisis. Global productive capacityand demand have shrunk massively as the pandemic intensified. Both production and the globalsupply chain have been severely disrupted by the “Great Lockdown”, as termed by the IMF.The global economic outlook has turned gloomier since April 2020, as countries struggle tocontain the pandemic. Most economists no longer see a ‘V’ shape recovery of the globaleconomy and predictions are for a much longer downturn.More than 150 countries around the world will be facing a GDP contraction.Policy responses by central banksFaced with such worsening situations, Central Banks around the world are finding themselves inthe frontlines.Since the onset of the pandemic, central banks have resorted to all kinds of measures, whetherconventional and unconventional measures to salvage their respective economies. Centralbanks are being looked up as saviours in these testing times.Domestic economic outlook and risksMauritius, as well, is not being spared by this global crisis. Much has already been said about theimpact and threat that the pandemic increasingly poses to our economy.The sectors most at risk include tourism, manufacturing in particular exports of textile, wholesaleand storage, business and administrative activities, ICT/BPO, transportation amongst others.These sectors account for nearly 40 per cent of GDP.The contraction in output this year will be severe and we have estimated that the economy couldcontract between 7.5% and 15%.The Bank is monitoring the situation closely. 1 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
Export sector and balance of paymentsThe export of goods and services sector is expected to slump massively, as external demandplunges amid severe economic contraction in our main exports markets.The significant drop in export earnings will amplify the current account deficit, projected at about12% of GDP in 2020. This year, the overall balance of payments is forecast to record a deficit.The tourism sector is a major supplier of foreign exchange. The foreign exchange loss from thisindustry alone has been estimated at around Rs12 billion for April and May 2020. Last year,tourism receipts amounted to Rs63 billion. This year, as long as the tourism industry remainsinoperative, there will be significant shortfalls in foreign exchange receipt.The pressure on foreign exchange earnings will be amplified by the shortfall in export earnings inother sectors as well, such as textile and fish products.The Bank, in line with its mandate, has taken necessary measures to maintain stability on theforeign exchange market and address any deficiency in foreign exchange liquidity.The Bank has sold USD172 million to banks since 18 March 2020. In addition, the Bankconducted swap transactions with banks for a total of USD100 million under its supportprogramme.Furthermore, the Bank has also provided the State Trading Corporation Ltd (STC) with foreignexchange for a total of USD55 million since 26 March 2020. The Bank will continue to provideforeign exchange to the STC to ensure adequate supply of essential goods to the public.I have to highlight that Mauritius has a floating exchange rate regime, as per the IMFclassification. The recent fluctuations of the exchange rate of the rupee is the result of theinterplay of market forces, both domestic and international. The Bank is continuously monitoringactivities on the domestic foreign exchange market. It stands ready to intervene as required tocontain excessive exchange rate volatility.At this point, let me reiterate the core mandates of the Bank: to maintain price stability, to promote orderly and balanced economic development, and to ensure the stability and soundness of the financial system.As such, and given the current context, the Bank of Mauritius will do whatever it takes tosafeguard the economy.All the measures taken by the Bank since March 2020 are a reflection of this commitment.Concretely, these measures aim at alleviating the financial burden of economic operators, SMEs,households, and individuals affected by COVID-19 and protecting jobs. It must be noted thatunder the Special Relief Scheme a total of Rs2 billion has been approved by commercial banksto economic operators to date. With respect to moratoria, commercial banks have approved thefollowing: For economic operators, an amount of Rs6.6 billion has been granted as moratorium oncapital repayment for a period of six months on outstanding loans amounting to Rs45 billion; For SMEs, an amount of Rs467 million has been granted as moratorium on both capital andinterest payments for a period of six months on outstanding loans amounting to Rs3.1billion; For individuals, an amount of Rs53 million has been granted as moratorium on both capital 2 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
and interest payments for a period of six months on outstanding loans amounting to nearlyRs600 million; For households, an amount of Rs140 million has been granted as moratorium on capitalrepayments for a period of six months on outstanding loans amounting to nearly Rs2.3billion. The Bank will be paying interest for households earning a combined monthly basicsalary of up to Rs50,000.Contribution of Rs60 billion to governmentAs the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic continue, Mauritius is undergoing its worst economicdownturn since its independence.It is within this spirit that last Friday that we announced two specific measures aimed atsupporting the economy.First, the Board of the Bank has decided to provide an amount of Rs60 billion to the State foreconomic stabilisation.As per the Bank’s mandate, this contribution aims at sustaining economic activity and mitigatingrisks to financial stability stemming from a weakening economy.I must also point out that the Bank will finance this contribution by issuing its own instruments forthe amount of Rs60 billion. The Bank is resorting to this issuance for the reason that there is andwill be ample rupee liquidity on the market. These monetary operations will promote orderlyconditions on the money market.Mauritius Investment Corporation LtdLet me now elaborate on the second measure that we announced. It relates to the setting up theMauritius Investment Corporation Ltd (MIC) which will support and accelerate economicdevelopment and build a value base for the current and future generations of our country.The MIC is being set up as a fully-owned subsidiary of the Bank of Mauritius. It will:First, assist systemically large, important and viable companies in Mauritius, which arefinancially distressed as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. These companies represent adirect threat to financial stability. I must here stress that should this not be done, companieswould face difficulties in servicing their financial obligations, thus adversely impacting thebanking sector. The risk of citizens losing their jobs is high. In this respect, MIC will invest inlarge- and medium-sized enterprises having a minimum annual turnover of Rs100 million;Second, invest in companies geared towards building self-sufficiency in key basicnecessities;Third, invest in companies enhancing Mauritius as an innovation-driven economy; andLast but not least, it will support the development of return-generating key strategic assetsand projects.To meet its objective, up to two billion US dollars from the foreign exchange reserves of the Bankwill be made available to the MIC. MIC will invest and manage these funds with a view of buildinga value base for the citizens of Mauritius. I must again point out that globally returns are innegative territories. By promptly investing part of our reserves in our country in these testingtimes, we are investing and building the future of Mauritius, hence allowing for orderly andbalanced economic development.I must reassure the public that, should the full amount of USD 2 Billion be used, the foreignexchange reserves of the Bank would still remain at an adequate level which is well above the 3 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
international norm.MIC will invest in eligible companies through a number of investment tools including both equityand quasi-equity instruments.Transparency, good governance and independence will be the bywords of the MIC. The MIC willbe run within a strict governance structure and in line with international norms. The Board ofDirectors of MIC will comprise an independent Chairman, the First Deputy Governor, the SecondDeputy Governor, and two Non-Executive Directors. I am pleased to announce that LordMeghnad Desai, Member of the House of Lords of the UK and renowned economist, has agreedto chair the Board of the MIC.There will be two distinct committees that will be set up:An Investment Committee, made up of independent experts who will assess all projects andmake appropriate recommendation to the Board of MIC.An Asset Management Committee will manage the assets under MIC.MIC will work closely with commercial banks in achieving its objectives.MIC will publish its audited financial statements and an annual report covering its activities duringits financial year. The financial statements will be consolidated with that of the Bank.Concluding remarksAmidst this rising uncertainty, the Bank of Mauritius is focused on working towards an economicrecovery, while mitigating any potential impact on the stability of the financial and banking systemin our country.I also wish to underline that the Bank has consulted, and is keeping the IMF fully briefed about allmeasures it is taking.We, at the Bank, stand ready to put in place what is required, and we will do whatever it takes tosave our economy.I thank you for your attention.  4 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
Christine Lagarde: Hearing at the Committee on Economic andMonetary Affairs of the European ParliamentIntroductory statement by Ms Christine Lagarde, President of the European Central Bank, beforethe Hearing at the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament,Brussels, 8 June 2020.*   *   *Madam Chair,Honourable members of the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee,Ladies and gentlemen,I very much appreciate the opportunity to speak to you today at my quarterly hearing before thisCommittee as ECB President. These regular exchanges are important at the best of times, andeven more so when times are difficult.Since the last monetary dialogue in early February, Europe has entered a crisis of anunprecedented scale. A crisis that is of no one’s making and that affects all EU Member States.Overcoming the crisis and mastering the recovery will require extraordinary action at bothnational and EU level.In my remarks today I will provide an overview of the economic outlook for the euro area andexplain the ECB’s recent monetary policy decisions in response to the coronavirus (COVID-19)crisis. I would then like to share some considerations on the policies needed to support theEuropean recovery.I will also say a few words on the international role of the euro – one of the topics chosen fortoday’s meeting. For more insights and analysis, however, I would like to refer you to the reportthat will be published on the ECB’s website later this week.The current economic outlook and the ECB’s recent decisionsThe COVID-19 pandemic and measures to contain the spread of the virus have caused anunprecedented contraction of economic activity in the euro area.After a contraction in GDP of 3.8% in the first quarter of the year, our new staff projections see itshrinking by 13% in the second quarter. Despite being expected to bounce back later in the yearand recover some of its lost ground, euro area real GDP is now projected to fall by 8.7% over thewhole of 2020, followed by growth of 5.2% in 2021 and 3.3% in 2022.The sharp drop in economic activity is also leaving its mark on euro area inflation. Year-on-yearHICP inflation declined further to 0.1% in May, mainly due to falling oil prices. Looking ahead, theinflation outlook has been revised downwards substantially over the entire projection horizon. Inthe baseline scenario, inflation is projected to average 0.3% in 2020, before rising slightly to 0.8%in 2021, and further to 1.3% in 2022.The monetary policy measures taken by the ECB in March were critical in removing the tail riskof the COVID-19 pandemic and the ensuing drop in economic activity morphing into a financialcrisis. Since March, that risk has receded materially.However, financial conditions are still tighter today than at the outset of the COVID-19 pandemic.Taken together, two main factors called for additional monetary policy easing: the deteriorating 1 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
inflation outlook threatening our medium-term price stability objective and the unwarrantedtightening of financial conditions. The Governing Council last Thursday decided to increase theamount of the pandemic emergency purchase programme (PEPP) by an additional €600 billionto a total of €1,350 billion, to extend the net purchase horizon until at least the end of June 2021,and to reinvest maturing assets acquired under the programme until at least the end of 2022.Two specific aspects of the PEPP made this programme the most appropriate tool in ourarsenal to step up the monetary policy impulse. First, in line with the execution of the programmeover the past two months or so, the in-built flexibility of the PEPP purchases can still play a keyrole in market stabilisation, safeguarding the smooth transmission of monetary policy acrossasset classes and among jurisdictions. Second, asset purchases are particularly effective ineasing the monetary policy stance in the current crisis environment because they can directlyaffect market funding conditions for companies and the price of credit for households and smalland medium-sized businesses.The increase in the envelope for the PEPP adds, of course, to the comprehensive package ofmonetary policy measures that we have implemented in response to the COVID-19 crisis.In addition to substantially scaling up our asset purchases, we are providing liquidity at muchmore favourable conditions through our credit operations. The targeted longer-term refinancingoperations (TLTRO III) are the most prominent and effective among them, as they allowsupporting bank lending to those affected most by the spread of the coronavirus, in particularsmall and medium-sized enterprises. In addition, we have significantly eased collateralrequirements, to make sure that banks can make full use of our credit operations and helpsustain the flow of credit.All these measures will support liquidity and funding conditions in the economy and help sustainthe flow of credit to households and firms. Maintaining favourable financing conditions for allsectors and jurisdictions will underpin the recovery of the economy from the coronavirus fallout.Our crisis-related measures are temporary, targeted and proportionate. Their temporary natureis reflected, for example, in the net purchase horizon of the PEPP, which is expected to run atleast until the end of June 2021, and in any case until the Governing Council judges that thecoronavirus crisis phase is over. They are targeted to the specific shock and contingency athand, aimed at repairing the economic hardships wrought by the pandemic. And they areproportionate to the severe risks to our mandate that we are facing.The measures we have taken in response to the COVID-19 crisis underscore the GoverningCouncil’s continued determination and readiness to adjust all of its instruments, as appropriate,to ensure that inflation moves towards its aim in a sustained manner.We remain fully committed to our mandate, that is beyond question. Allow me to spend a fewwords on this as it is the other topic you have chosen for today’s hearing.The ECB received a primary objective from the drafters of the Treaty: that of maintaining pricestability. Without prejudice to this priority, the ECB shall support the general economic policies ofthe European Union.Indeed, price stability goes hand in hand with a healthy economy and a sound financial system.This is reflected in the measures taken by the ECB in recent years in pursuit of price stability.These measures have not only prevented the economy from entering depressed and deflationaryconditions, but have also contributed to supporting employment and reducing financial stabilityrisks.In this context, the ECB has to, of course, constantly evaluate whether its policy measuresachieve their intended purpose. This assessment also includes analysing potential side effects of 2 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
the measures considered and determining whether alternative instruments might be moreefficient in attaining the objective. In my first hearing before this Committee in September 2019, Ireferred to this assessment as a “cost-benefit analysis”.More generally, the ECB continually monitors the proportionality of its instruments. Suchassessments are conducted regularly, as reflected in the monetary policy accounts, inspeeches, and not least in the regular exchanges with the European Parliament such as the onetoday. The ECB’s strategy review will also play an important part in these ongoing effortsFor instance, consider our decision to expand the volume of the PEPP: on the basis of solidanalysis, we determined that asset purchases are a particularly effective tool in the currentenvironment. Given the still fragile state of transmission, they are also more efficient thanalternative instruments, as they have a more direct impact on the borrowing conditions faced byhouseholds and firms.Given the continued disruptions caused by the pandemic, the net effects to be gained from thePEPP expansion are overwhelmingly positive.The additional asset purchases will contribute to easing credit conditions for the private sectorand thus support viable businesses in continuing to operate and in retaining as many workers aspossible. This will help to preserve jobs, which is the most important factor determining theincome and financial security of individuals and families in the euro area. Our measures play akey role in supporting credit intermediation through banks, not least since the business prospectsof the banking system depend first and foremost on the macroeconomic outlook. Finally, ourdecisions will make sure that higher borrowing needs by fiscal authorities associated with thenecessary fiscal response to the crisis will not translate into materially higher interest rates forthe private sector.Overall, the decision to expand the PEPP will prove to have been essential in avoiding an evendeeper recession and in quickening our pathway to normalisation.Our measures to combat the crisis also build on instruments already in place that continue toprovide significant monetary policy support: our asset purchases under the asset purchaseprogramme, our very low key interest rates, and our forward guidance that firmly connects ourinterest rate policy and our asset purchases to the outlook for price stability.Priorities for the recoveryThe ECB measures will continue to be crucial in supporting the return of inflation towards ourmedium-term inflation aim after the worst of the crisis has passed and the euro area economybegins its journey to economic recovery.Faced with an extraordinary challenge, Europe will need an extraordinary response.The EU budget can play a key role in mobilising the necessary resources and putting them toproductive use. To do so, it will have to be ambitious – not just in size, but also in its priorities andits effective implementation.The European Commission’s proposal for a revised Multiannual Financial Framework and theNext Generation EU are decisive in this regard. And we should not forget that the largestsupranational issuance in euro ever announced that is associated with the proposal could alsohave a positive impact on the international role of the euro.It will be important to adopt this package quickly. Setting a clear timeline will give more certaintyand confidence to citizens, businesses and financial markets. Any delay risks generatingnegative spillovers and driving up the costs, and hence the financing needs, of this crisis. 3 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
European spending will be most effective if its focus is on projects that add real value from aEuropean perspective.The primary common interest is to reduce the fragmentation stemming from the present crisisand divergence in the longer run.Thanks to the Single Market we are each other’s most important trading partners and customers.This was true before the crisis and will especially hold true in a global environment characterisedby weak trade and demand.But for the Single Market to work as an engine of convergence, European companies shouldcompete on similar terms. For our joint benefit, European spending should aim to re-establish alevel playing field and support those most affected by the crisis.We also have a common interest in generating the conditions for long-term sustainable growthand protecting the welfare of European citizens. The crisis can be an opportunity to moderniseour economies to make them fit for the future.The transition towards a greener economy is a crucial part of this. We have the opportunity tostep up the EU’s efforts to achieve its sustainability objectives by including climate change andsustainability considerations in the financial response to the COVID-19 pandemic.Sustainable finance will be key to the transition to a carbon neutral economy. Today, wepublished our reply to the Commission’s public consultation and reaffirmed our readiness, in linewith our mandate, to support the efforts of governments, public institutions and the privatesector. Moreover, our forthcoming report on the international role of the euro finds that the eurowas the main currency of denomination for the issuance of green bonds in 2019.Another key dimension is the digital transformation. Here, the recent lockdowns have acceleratedthe adoption of digital technologies on a broader basis. Now is the time to expedite the digitaltransformation on a more permanent basis and bring the EU to the frontier of the digitaleconomy.If combined with appropriate reforms at the national level, these measures will strengtheneconomic resilience and boost our economies in areas with high cross-border spillovers.ConclusionLet me conclude.Our common response to this crisis, if used to effectively direct investment towards strategicpriority areas, can be a catalyst for realising Europe’s longer-term vision.Ensuring a successful recovery will require all EU institutions to do their part. I very muchwelcome the European Parliament’s call for an ambitious European response. I count on thishouse and this Committee to design a strong and effective Multiannual Financial Framework.At the same time, you can rest assured that the ECB will within its mandate continue to supportthe recovery with all appropriate measures.I now stand ready to answer your questions.Eurosystem reply to the European Commission’s public consultations on the Renewed Sustainable FinanceStrategy and the revision of the Non-Financial Reporting Directive11 4 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
Jacqueline Loh: Keeping green and impact in focusKeynote speech by Ms Jacqueline Loh, Deputy Managing Director of the Monetary Authority ofSingapore, at Asian Venture Philanthropy Network (AVPN) Virtual Conference 2020, 8 June 2020.*   *   *Ms Naina Batra, Chairperson and CEO, AVPNDistinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen1.     Good morning. Thank you for inviting me to the eighth AVPN Conference. I am very glad thatAVPN has pressed on with this flagship event virtually in these unprecedented times.2.     The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in significant health, economic and socialchallenges globally. The IMF has projected that global GDP will contract by 3% this year,marking a significantly deeper downturn than the 0.1% contraction in 2009 during the GlobalFinancial Crisis.3.     “The Power of Networks”, which is the theme of this year’s AVPN conference, ishighly apt as we strive towards the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (UNSDGs). Addressing complex and multi-dimensional challenges like climate action, inequality, andquality healthcare and education requires policymakers, financial institutions, corporates, non-governmental organisations, and multilateral development banks (MDBs), to come together on acommon global challenge.4.     The financial sector and MDBs have stepped up and shored capital towardsbuilding capacity in healthcare and pharmaceuticals, while supporting the recovery.Social and sustainability bond issuances totalled US$24 billion in the first quarter ofthis year, nearly double that of the same period last year. The bond proceeds arechannelled to support healthcare and pharmaceutical development, for the benefit oflower income households and small businesses.The World Bank’s pandemic bond facility has been triggered, and will provide US$195million in emergency financing to 64 of the world’s poorest countries to support theirrecovery.5.     Today, I will focus on opportunities in green and sustainable finance, and impact investing.Pushing forward with green finance for a sustainable world6.     The pandemic provides a prime opportunity for countries to “build back better”. It isimportant now, more than ever, that countries not only rebuild their economies and preservejobs, but also in the process, intentionally build a more sustainable new economy. There havebeen growing calls for governments to prioritise or accelerate green infrastructure developmentas part of recovery plans.Infrastructure development is critical to driving economic growth and improving socialoutcomes, while climate change remains a significant threat to mankind. It is importantthat a right balance between growth and sustainability be achieved.Public-private partnerships will be key to achieving this. Last week, Infrastructure Asiain Singapore partnered the World Bank Group and Singapore Management Universityto build capabilities of regional government officials, and raise awarenss of solutions tosupport sustainable and resilient infrastructure development, such as clean energyprojects.1234 1 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
7.     Singapore is committed to support the pivot towards a clean and sustainable future.MAS announced our green finance action plan last year, which comprises three key thrusts:firstly, building resilience to environmental risks;secondly, developing green finance solutions and markets; andthirdly, leveraging innovation and technology.8.     We have made good progress across all three thrusts.We will issue a consultation paper on MAS’ Environmental Risk ManagementGuidelines for the banking, insurance, and asset management sectors later this year.These guidelines will set standards on governance, risk management, and disclosure,to enhance the financial system’s resilience to environmental risk.Last year, we expanded the sustainable bond grant scheme to support not just greenbut also social and sustainability bonds. This year, to accelerate green andsustainability linked lending, we are developing a green and sustainability loan grantscheme, which aims to defray the costs of external review and bank frameworks forsuch loans. This seeks to increase the ease of loan origination and reduce expensesfor small and medium sized enterprises (SMEs), and encourage SMEs, corporates,as well as banks to integrate green and sustainability issues in their financingdiscussions and decisions.We will also be anchoring centres of excellence in Singapore, to undertake qualitygreen finance research and talent development, with strong customisation andapplications for Asia’s transition needs.9.     The theme for the Global FinTech Hackcelerator, in this year’s Singapore FinTechFestival, is “Building Resilience, Seizing Opportunities, Emerging Stronger”. TheHackcelerator will identify solutions that enable financial institutions to respond to the pandemicand climate change. MAS has received a record 100 problem statements, on pertinent areasincluding:improving supply chain resilience amidst disruptions to manufacturing and the flow ofgoods and services during the pandemic;driving social impact by improving credit access for lower-income individuals andSMEs; andaccelerating green finance flows to support low-carbon economic activities.I welcome your support in rallying start-ups in your networks to submit their proposed solutions.10.     We encourage the financial sector and corporates to work in tandem with MAS’green finance efforts. On this front, we have seen encouraging developments even in recentmonths.Global banks like Deutsche Bank and JPMorgan have pledged to increase sustainablefinancing flows.The National University of Singapore (NUS) became the first university in Asia to issuea green bond, working with OCBC and DBS Bank. NUS issued S$300 million tofinance projects targeted at green buildings, renewable energy, and sustainablemanagement of water and land.CapitaLand raised S$1.5 billion through sustainable finance this year, including aS$500 million sustainability linked loan from UOB, the Singapore real estate sector’slargest issuance, two weeks ago. 2 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
Investing in sustainability and impact11.     Moving beyond bonds and loans, asset managers should seize this opportunity tolaunch robust green and sustainability focused fund strategies, in anticipation of risingdemand from investors in a post-COVID-19 world.Global investments that factor in environmental, social and governance (ESG)considerations have increased by 70% between 2014 and 2018.The momentum will likely persist, with early indications that corporates with good ESGratings are exposed to less systemic risks and are more resilient to shocks.Since the onset of COVID-19, 24 of 26 Morningstar sustainable index fundsoutperformed their closest conventional counterparts, while global sustainable open-ended funds registered net inflows of US$40 billion in 1Q 2020, over 40% more year-on-year, despite a weakening in global market conditions.12.     Foundations, trusts, and family offices are also well placed to drive positive changethrough your investments and your business operations. Impact investing serves to bridgethe gap between philanthropy and asset management. Allocation to impact funds managed byprivate equity and venture capital managers will allow investors to make a positive impact, whilegenerating market competitive financial returns.13.     I am glad to see that AVPN has dedicated a full day during this conference to impactinvesting, covering topics such as impact management and maximising social impact withinfamily offices. While impact investing is still a nascent development, there has been goodprogress.Close to 100 asset managers and institutional investors have signed the OperatingPrinciples for Impact Management, which provides a set of market standards on howto achieve measurable positive environmental and social outcomes, alongsidefinancial returns.In May 2020, the Global Impact Investing Network (GIIN) formed a Response,Recovery, and Resilience Investment Coalition with AVPN and other networks andfoundations, to coordinate efforts and direct capital to high impact solutions inresponse to the pandemic.14.     The fund raising outlook for impact investing strategies remains strong despiterecent challenging months. Managers in Asia can play a meaningful role in creating impactand capitalise on this opportunity.  For example:Impact Investment Exchange, a Singapore-based enterprise whose platforms connectimpact investors with underserved communities, issued its second Women’sLivelihood Bond in January this year. The US$12 million social bond is listed on theSingapore Exchange and a third bond is being planned as part of the US$150 millionseries.BlackRock recently launched an actively managed impact fund to invest in firmsaddressing global challenges like COVID-19 and advancing the UN SDGs.Conclusion15.     In conclusion, the pandemic has raised the importance of the climate and sustainabilityagenda, and I encourage the financial sector to not lose sight of these issues even as countriesand corporates rebuild. This virtual conference, bringing together over 5,000 participants from 80markets, is timely for us to continue sharing insights and experiences as we work together toaddress global challenges. I hope that you will form new partnerships and deepen existing ones567 3 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
through this virtual conference. I wish you a very fruitful week ahead. Thank you.International Monetary Fund (IMF), 6 April 2020, World Economic Outlook, April 2020: The Great LockdownEuromoney, 7 April 2020, Coronavirus crisis offers green and social bonds chance to prove their worthWorld Bank Press Release No: 2020/180/HNP, 27 April 2020Infrastructure Asia and World Bank Press Releases, 1 June 2020Global Sustainable Investment Alliance, April 2019, 2018 Global Sustainable Investment ReviewMorningstar, 3 April 2020, Sustainable funds weather the first quarter better than conventional funds;Morningstar, 28 May 2020, What the pandemic means for sustainable investingBlackRock compilation at 18 May 2020, Sustainable investing: resilience amid uncertainty1234567 4 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
SpeechPanic, Pandemic and Payment PreferencesMichele BullockAssistant Governor (Financial System)Keynote Address at the Morgan Stanley Disruption Evolved WebcastOnline – 3 June 2020Thank you to Morgan Stanley for the opportunity to speak this morning.We are living through quite extraordinary times. The COVID-19 pandemic is having dramatic effects on economies around the world, impacting employment, businesses and households. Monetary and fiscal policies have been heavily mobilised to help bridge the impact of the containment measures on economic activity. But the health crisis has also disrupted aspects of the retail payments system; payment patterns have seen large, sudden shifts as merchants and consumers have changed both their payment preferences and their mode of interaction. Payment service providers have tried to accommodate these shifts in preferences in a fast-changing environment.Today I want to address the potential implications of COVID-19 for the payments system. While we have until now been thinking about disruption to the payments system mostly in terms of the entry of new technologically enabled service providers, the abrupt changes in payment preferences induced by the health crisis could be a similarly disruptive force. The extent to which it is will depend on whether the changes in behaviour are temporary or permanent.Today I am going to discuss the potential payments policy implications if the changes we have seen during this period are a step change in payment preferences. I will start with some context on how the retail payments system has been evolving over recent years and the changes we have seen as a result of the COVID-19 crisis. I will then go on to discuss a number of policy issues arising from these changes.[*]
The way we pay has been changing …Over the past couple of decades, the way Australians make payments has followed a fairly consistent trend. The main feature of this trend has been the decline in ‘paper’ payment instruments and the rise of electronic payment instruments (Graph 1). Use of cheques has declined from around 50 per capita per year in the 1990s to around 2 per capita in 2019, as payments such as bills increasingly moved electronic. Use of cash for transactions has also been declining. The rise of cards, first credit cards and more recently debit cards, has been a consistent feature as well. Cards have increasingly been used in place of cheques for bill payments and cash at the point of sale. They were also an important enabler for online commerce, allowing payments to be made in a remote environment.Graph 1In recent years, substantial innovation in the payments industry has furthered these trends and also widened payment options (Graph 2). The introduction of contactless payments has made it quicker and easier to make lower-value transactions by card, eating further into the traditional domain of cash transactions. The use of mobile devices like smartphones for payments has reinforced this trend – now you don't even have to pull out 
a card. Real-time person-to-person payments are now available using the New Payments Platform. Buy now, pay later payment options are now widely available for online and point-of-sale purchases. There has been plenty of discussion about the potential disruption to the payments space coming from ‘bigtechs’ – Amazon, Apple, Google, Facebook, Alipay and WeChat Pay. And then there are digital currencies – private sector or central bank issued. Although some of these newer methods of payment may not be extensively used, consumers are increasingly aware of them.Graph 2But cash is still important.The increasing innovation in the payments system has resulted in substantial changes to the way we pay, yet there is still a significant minority of the population that continue to use cash for face-to-face payments. Our most recent consumer payments survey conducted late last year showed that there were still around 25 per cent of consumer payments undertaken using cash, accounting for around 10 per cent of the value of 
transactions (Graph 3). And while a third of survey respondents did not use cash for any payments, around 10 per cent used cash for all their payments. Cash users tended to be older or people on lower incomes.Graph 3COVID-19 might be the ultimate disrupterEnter COVID-19. The anecdotal evidence suggests that there has been some behavioural change. It has come from fast-changing consumer and merchant payment preferences, changing purchasing behaviour and responses by payment service providers to facilitate change.Both merchants and consumers appear to have been keen to reduce their use of cash. Many merchants made it clear through signage that they preferred contactless card payment, even for low-value payments. Some even went as far as to indicate that they would not accept cash. Maybe partly in response to this, and their own concerns about hygiene, many people reduced their use of cash in stores. In addition, there was a significant shift to online shopping, where cash is simply not a payment option. As a result 
of these changes, ATM withdrawals in April were down 30 per cent from the month before and over 40 per cent lower than twelve months earlier.Payment providers have facilitated these moves. The transaction limit below which a PIN is not required for a contactless card payment was (temporarily) raised from $100 to $200 to further reduce the need to touch terminals. Banks promoted mobile payments, which, because of biometric identification, often do not require PINs even for large purchases. And banks also obtained dispensation to mail out debit cards to a large number of their customers that did not already have them.All of these changes are likely to result in permanent shifts in behaviour as some people maintain the new ways of doing things. People who have recently obtained a debit card for the first time now have the ability to use a card at the point of sale as well as make online purchases. The increased use of online shopping, either through necessity or preference during the ‘stay at home' period, seems likely to be a permanent shift. In response, many retailers have increased their online offerings and may even find that they can reduce their physical presence. There have been some calls for the ‘no PIN’ limit to be maintained at the current higher level, which would make point-of-sale card payments even easier. And mobile payments have probably received a permanent leg-up.There are a number of policy implicationsWe have been thinking about the policy implications of the changing payments system for some time. Many of the issues were raised in our consultation document on the Review of Retail Payments Regulation (the Review). I am going to focus on five issues here: the cost of electronic payments; technological lock-out; resilience of electronic payments; access to cash; and the future of cheques.Costs to merchants of electronic payments must be kept as low as possibleThe cost of payments for merchants is an issue that the Bank has been focused on since it was given responsibility for efficiency and competition in the payments system in 1998. From the early days of its work on interchange fees, the Bank has been concerned with the way in which competition between payment systems works. In particular, since merchants are reluctant to refuse any payment method that consumers present, for fear of losing a sale, they typically take as many as possible. If a sufficient number of their competitors take a payment method, it is very difficult for a merchant to refuse that payment mechanism. The result of this is that they have limited ability to resist increases in the cost of taking payments. And as costs of payments rise, they ultimately find themselves into the prices charged to consumers.[1]
While cash is not costless for merchants to accept, it does provide some competitive pressure on the cost of payments more broadly. So as cash use declines, it is even more important than ever that we ensure competitive pressure remains on the costs of electronic payments to merchants. There are a couple of ways in which this competitive pressure can manifest. The first is the use of surcharging. Merchants may not feel that they can refuse to accept a particular payment method. But they may be prepared to signal to customers that it is costly to them by imposing a surcharge for its use. They may not even need to surcharge – in some cases simply the threat of surcharging may be enough to negotiate a lower fee with the payment provider.Second, and particularly relevant for card payments, is least-cost routing. Least-cost routing puts some power into the hands of merchants by providing them the ability to route a dual-network debit card transaction through the network that costs them the least to accept. In Australia, for many merchants, this is the eftpos network (Graph 4). The evidence is that the growing availability of least-cost routing has increased competition among card schemes through reductions in interchange fees, and this has resulted in a lower cost of acceptance for card payments for some merchants.
Graph 4But while least-cost routing has been available for a couple of years, it has not been widely promoted by the major banks which account for most of the acquiring market in Australia. So with many customers switching to contactless in response to COVID-19, some merchants are finding their payment costs rise as debit card payments are automatically routed through the international schemes. It is therefore important that merchants be given the option of least-cost routing.So far, the Bank has not mandated that acquirers explicitly offer least-cost routing to all their merchants. But it remains an option that will be considered in the Review. In the meantime, we are talking with merchants to understand their experience with payment costs through this period. We will also be considering how transparency of the cost of the payment plans offered to merchants could be improved. Ultimately though, if market forces are not generating competition to lower the cost of debit card payments, we may need to consider lowering the benchmarks that serve as a cap on average interchange fees.
We need to be on guard against technological lock-outLeast-cost routing works because the physical cards being presented at the point-of-sale terminal are provisioned with two networks – so-called dual-network debit cards. But what if there is no physical card, as is the case with mobile payments? How do we encourage provisioning of dual networks in these circumstances and encourage the mobile and terminal technology to enable merchant choice of routing. There are already some disputes in this area. Some banks have been choosing to provision only one debit system, so the option to route is being limited. And there are further disputes in the wings on scheme-dependent tokenisation of ‘card on file’ transactions and the problems this might create for least-cost routing. As highlighted in our consultation document, this is a challenging area. But ultimately, if banks or other stakeholders are acting in ways that prevent downward pressure on merchant fees, we may need to consider regulatory options for keeping the cost of electronic payments low.With people carrying less cash, resilience is paramountSo far during the COVID-19 period, the electronic payment system has had very few severe outages (despite the need for providers to quickly adopt different working arrangements). This is a welcome outcome. Given the reduced use of cash during this period, it could have been even more difficult for merchants were there to be disruptions to the electronic payment system. And in the circumstances a loss of access to funds could have caused harm to customers and dented confidence within the community. But this episode does highlight something we have been concerned about for some time – the importance of the resilience of the retail payments system.There are effectively two parts to this – the resilience of the shared infrastructure such as the payment card message and switching infrastructure, and the resilience of financial institutions' own systems. While there have occasionally been system infrastructure outages, most of the outages over the past few years have been in banks' systems. Sometimes it has been their account systems affecting the ability of customers to make payments. Sometimes it has been their merchant-facing systems so that merchants were unable to take payments. In these cases, often the only fall-back at the point of sale is cash. Prior to COVID-19, there was already a sizeable proportion of people who tended to have little or no cash in their wallets. So when disruptions did happen there were stories of people leaving goods at the counter and merchants effectively having to close until the systems were restored. Post-COVID-19, disruptions to electronic payment services are likely to have a bigger impact. With some merchants discouraging use of cash, we can expect fewer people to be carrying cash than before.The Bank has already been working with the industry and APRA to develop a set of standard operational performance statistics to be disclosed by individual institutions. The 
proposed disclosures are intended to focus the minds of banks' executives and directors and ensure that appropriate attention is paid to the reliability of their retail payment services. They will also provide customers with transparency about the operational performance of different institutions. While this work is being delayed a bit by the competing operational priorities created by the current circumstances, it has become even more important.The work to enhance the reliability of retail payments services provided by individual institutions must also be complemented by efforts to identify and mitigate risks of reliance on supporting infrastructure that can be ‘single points of failure’, such as the telecommunications and energy sectors. While disruptions to these types of infrastructures have been more isolated than those at individual institutions over the past few years, they can have a major impact if they occur. As part of its strategic agenda, the Australian Payments Council is developing a framework for assessing and responding to system-wide risks.What does decreased demand for cash mean for the ATM system?Withdrawals of cash from ATMs have declined sharply over the past couple of months (Graph 5). ATM withdrawals have been on a trend downward decline for a number of years. But the decline seen in March and April was a substantial downward shift in the level of withdrawals. This no doubt reflects both a decrease in spending overall as people stayed home as well as a shift to other payment mechanisms – contactless cards and online shopping in particular. It seems likely that a large part of this will become a permanent change in behaviour.[2]
Graph 5With cash withdrawals declining, there will be further pressure to consolidate ATM networks. The industry had been already considering this issue over the past couple of years but the changes induced by COVID-19 will make this more urgent. I expect that there will be action on this issue more quickly now. But there are still some people that prefer to use cash, so consolidation of the ATM network will need to be managed in such a way that it does not disadvantage certain parts of the population that still rely heavily on cash.Is this suggesting the end of the cheque system?I think it may well be. Use of cheques has been on a steep decline for the past 20 years, both in terms of number of cheques written and the value (Graph 6). In April, the value of cheque payments was more than 40 per cent lower than twelve months earlier, compared with annual rates of decline of around 20 per cent in previous months. And the level of cheque usage has now fallen to such low levels that there is an active discussion about the future of the system. Cheques have always been a costly payment instrument – estimates 
from our latest cost study in 2014 suggested that cheques were around six times more costly than card payments in terms of resource costs per transaction. With the continuing decline in the number of cheques being processed, the fixed costs of maintaining the system are becoming a more significant issue.Graph 6One option that is actively being considered by the industry is closure of the cheque system. With electronic conveyancing increasingly the norm, a major use of financial institution cheques is being phased out. And for bill payments, where cheques are still sometimes used, there are many alternatives. But there has been a concern that there are some people for which there is no suitable alternative to payment using a cheque. They may not have reliable access to the internet to undertake online banking, for example, or may not have a debit or credit card.The changes associated with COVID-19 provide an opportunity to reassess this. With social distancing affecting some branch services and the ability of people to get to branches, there has been a push by the banks to get people signed up to internet banking. Payment options such as BPAY and NPP will therefore be available to a wider range of people. As 
© Reserve Bank of Australia, 2001–2020.All rights reserved.The Reserve Bank of Australia acknowledges the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples of Australia as the Traditional Custodians of this land, and recognises their continuing connection to Country. We pay our respects to their Elders, past, present and emerging.noted earlier, the banks have mailed out debit cards to customers, typically passbook holders who did not have them, providing the option of online and in-person payments by card. It seems likely that these changes, which have happened much more quickly than they might have otherwise, will further reduce the use of cheques and demonstrate to people that there are alternative and more efficient ways of making payments. This may bring the efficiency implications of maintaining the cheque system into even sharper focus.ConclusionThe changes in payment preferences associated with the COVID-19 health crisis have given fresh prominence to a number of policy issues in the payments system. Some of the sharp and sudden shift to contactless and mobile payments, and away from cash is likely to be permanent. It is therefore even more important that the costs of electronic payments are kept low and the electronic payments system is resilient. While it will be important to ensure that people who have traditionally used cash and cheques are adequately catered for, the experience of the past few months has demonstrated that the shift to electronic is perhaps not as difficult as many had thought.EndnotesThanks to Faye Wang for assistance with this speech. [*]See RBA (2019), ‘Review of Retail Payments Regulation – Issues Paper’, November. Available at <https://www.rba.gov.au/payments-and-infrastructure/review-of-retail-payments-regulation/>. [1]See Australian Payments Council (2019), ‘Payments in a Global, Digital World – The Australian Payments Council Strategic Agenda’. [2]
Yakiv Smolii: Labor market and monetary policyOpening speech by Mr Yakiv Smolii, Governor of the National Bank of Ukraine, at the AnnualResearch Conference "Labor Market and Monetary Policy", organized by the National Bank ofUkraine and the National Bank of Poland, online, 28 May 2020.*   *   *Ladies and Gentlemen,Welcome to the Annual Research Conference of the National Bank of Ukraine and NarodowyBank Polski. Today’s event is special. First, it is the fifth anniversary conference. Second, it isheld online for the first time. Third, we will discuss a very sensitive topic that is especiallyimportant for the world today as it suffers from the coronavirus crisis: the labor market andmonetary policy.Although the event is remote, speakers and participants from around thirty countries havegathered in this virtual room. Indeed, the topic of this year’s conference is relevant for anycountry.Many countries have managed to rein in inflation and attain low levels of unemployment over pastdecades. However, economic inequality, population aging, migration, and numerous otheraspects continue to threaten economic development and long-term macroeconomic stability ofthe world.Let’s look at the key labor market trends that shape the global economy today.Demographic trends go first. The development of the healthcare system allows people to livelonger. However, with insufficiently high birth rates, this leads to a gradual population aging. Asa result, increased pressure is put on the social security system and on employees and statebudgets in the case of pension systems where mandatory contributions are made to the generalpension fund.With globalization, labor market liberalization, and conflicts in a number of countries, the worldhas faced greater migration from lower-income countries to the countries where incomes arehigher.  According to the International Organization for Migration, there are currently 272 millionmigrants in the world. The labor migrants account for two thirds of this number.On the one hand, the global economy benefits from economic migration. Labor migrants’ hostcountries cover their needs in labor force, attract younger workers, and experience an increasein productivity and entrepreneurial spirit, a trait that is more typical of labor migrants than of thosewho stay home. In turn, migrants’ home countries receive short-term dividends in the form ofremittances, which are rather stable compared to other financial inflows.On the other hand, international migration has a flip side: the shortage of labor force in migrants’home countries, opposite pressures on wages in host and home countries, and increasedburden for the social security and healthcare systems – not to mention the social and politicalconsequences.Another upside of international migration is that it helps reduce global economic inequality.According to the World Bank, inequality between all people in the world has declined since 1990.However, the benefits of economic growth within countries are still distributed very unevenly.According to the World Bank, since 2008, economic inequality within countries has largelystopped rising due to the fact that in most countries, along with economic growth, incomes of theless well-off 40% of the population have increased. However, these 40% of the population still 1 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
receive less than 25% of total income of the total population. Thus, despite fairly positive trends,inequality within countries is still even higher than 25 years ago.The corona crisis in most cases has only made things worseThe Great Lockdown, as some have already named this crisis, will lead to a sharp decline ineconomic growth. The global economy will lose 3% of real GDP this year, according to the IMF. Apartial recovery will take place next year, but GDP will still be below pre-virus levels. But this isonly possible if the pandemic eases and quarantine measures are gradually relaxed this year,which is highly uncertain.The coronavirus has hit the labor market the hardest. Due to the corona crisis globalworking hours in the second quarter may decrease by 10.5 per cent compared to the last pre-crisis quarter. This is equivalent to 305 million full-time jobs. In addition, it could jeopardize 1.6billion people working in the informal economy, which is about half of the global workforce. Theseare rather appalling data from the International Labor Organization.The coronavirus does not seem to discriminate between the rich and the poor, or between white-collar and blue-collar workers. However, the actual economic fallout from the pandemic isvery unevenly distributed. In today’s world, the poorer the people, the simpler and lower-paidthe jobs they hold, and the more that they rely on their jobs as the sole source of income, themore that they suffer. Previous pandemics and crises have only exacerbated inequality, and thecorona crisis is unlikely to be an exception, according to a recent study by a group of economistsfrom the Center for Economic Policy Research. Incidentally, we will have the opportunity to hearone of these researchers tomorrow. The current crisis could even lead to a more significantincrease in economic inequality than its predecessors, as it is more pervasive and profound thanprevious crises.Unfortunately, Ukraine is all too familiar with many of these problemsWe expect that unemployment in Ukraine will peak at 11.5% in Q2 2020 due to the corona crisis,compared to 8.2% last year. As the gradual easing of quarantine measures that has started inMay continues and the economy recovers, unemployment will also decline in H2 2020, but willremain higher than last year.The job losses that hit Ukrainians as businesses closed down have not only complicated jobsearch efforts by increasing the workload per vacancy, but also have shown that there will be noeasy solution to the labor migration problem in Ukraine. Some Ukrainians working abroad did noteven return home for the quarantine, as they in particular feared the prospect of becomingjobless in Ukraine. They chose remaining abroad and being temporarily unemployed over cominghome and struggling to find any work at all after the lockdown is lifted. And those who did returnare now forced to compete against “local” laid-off workers for jobs that rarely pay as much asthese migrants earned in other countries. For this reason, migrant workers have been leavingUkraine again in search of better pay since quarantine restrictions were partially relaxed.Demand for Ukrainian workers in Poland, for example, has not disappeared.However, most of the problems in the Ukrainian labor market are not related to COVID-19.First, one of the systemic problems of the Ukrainian economy has for years been themismatch between job seeker skills and employer requirements.Late last year, a third of companies cited labor shortages as being one of the key factors limitingproduction, according to business surveys. This partially explains why unemployment in 2019was quite high despite significant demand for labor from businesses.Not the least role in this is played by the fact that the Ukrainian education system does not keep 2 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
up with the changes in the modern labor market, which are taking place under pressure ofglobalization and technological progress. As a result, according to the State Statistics Service, inUkraine about a third of employees with higher education worked in a profession that does notrequire such. This is one of the highest rates in Europe.• Second, low productivity.Despite having grown over the past 15 years, productivity is still low. Ukraine is below the top onehundred countries in an ILO ranking of countries by productivity. In 2019, labor productivity inUkraine was lower not only compared to EU member states, but also relative to several formerSoviet countries.• Third, population decline and aging.Ukraine ranks 12th in the world in terms of population decline, according to World Bank data.Overall, Ukraine has 11 pensioners per 10 employees. As a result, the Pension Fund needsconstant additional contributions from the state budget. This diverts public funds from beingspent on investment and education, and weighs on potential GDP growth.The high workload on employed individuals further increases the already elevated levels ofinformal employment. In 2019, one in five workers in Ukraine was employed informally. Accordingto the ILO forecast, by 2024, the burden on the working population by dependent people willincrease compared to 2019 even more – by 6%.• Fourth, labor migration, as I have mentioned already.There are no exact data on the number of Ukrainians working abroad. However, according tovarious estimates, it is about 3 million people. Some of them are seasonal workers. Last year, anaverage of approximately 2.5 million of our citizens were abroad at a given point in time,according to NBU estimates.For us, this presents a double challenge. Not only does labor migration affect the quantity andquality of labor resources and labor productivity in Ukraine, but also it makes our economyheavily dependent on remittances. Ukraine ranks 12th globally in terms of total incomingremittances and is in the top 15 countries by the remittances to GDP ratio (not counting islandstates).• Fifth, low labor force participation.In particular, the labor force participation of women in Ukraine is insufficient compared to Europe.While the labor force participation of men in the population aged 15 and older is 65%, that ofwomen is 49%. This is due to difficulties with accessing childcare services, and the lowavailability of part-time employment. In its turn, low labor force participation puts a drag onpotential GDP growth.How can monetary policy help in such cases?A dual mandate whereby a central bank pursues both price stability and full employment is notparticularly commonplace in today’s world. The Reserve Bank of Australia and the U.S. FederalReserve have pursued dual mandates since post-war times, as has the Reserve Bank of NewZealand since a year ago.However, making monetary policy decisions that take labor markets into account does notrequire a dual mandate. In fact, the effectiveness of monetary policy depends on a deepunderstanding by central banks of the mechanisms governing labor markets. After all, it has beenproven that there is a close link between wage growth and inflation. And labor migration in many 3 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
countries has a significant impact on inflation – both through labor supply and wages and throughremittances and the exchange rate.For example, the rise in labor migration from Ukraine in 2016–2019, in particular to Poland, wasone of the key factors fueling the rapid increase in wages. This has led to the growth inproduction costs and thus in prices, especially those for services. In addition, when productivityis low, high wages make domestic producers less competitive, which in turn restrains economicgrowth. Have we considered this in conducting our monetary policy? We certainly have.Moreover, we, the central banks, even under the standard “single” mandate for theinflation target, care about macroeconomic stability, economic growth, and hence theunemployment rate.The task of a central bank is to strike a balance between keeping inflation at the target level andpromoting economic growth. And as the current crisis has shown, it is possible and necessary tocontribute to the achievement of goals at the same time. However, given the circumstances, it isnecessary to act decisively and unconventionally.In recent months, we have seen developed countries with near-zero interest rates resort tonontraditional monetary policy instruments. Meanwhile, emerging economies that still have roomfor monetary easing are relying on standard tools.For instance, we at the NBU have done a lot to support the economy during the corona crisis andto strengthen its ability to quickly get back on its feet when it’s over. We have slashed the keypolicy rate from 11% to 8% in just the past two months and are not ruling out the possibility offurther cuts. We have expanded the list of bank liquidity support tools and facilitated access tothese tools. We have introduced long-term refinancing for banks for a period of 1 to 5 years andan interest rate swap with banks, and made a currency swap deal with the EBRD so that it canprovide hryvnia loans to Ukrainian companies. We have thus created conditions in whichbusinesses can access funding at affordable rates, not only for short-term needs, but also forlarge-scale business projects that require long-term investments. We have taken steps toensure that financial stability does not become another source of problems for the economy.However, the power of central banks has its limits. Can we do anything about thedifferences in people’s perceptions of economic recovery?No, I don’t think we can. I think we should leave this up to national governments. In times such asthese, central governments ought to prioritize fiscal incentives, including targeted measures tomaintain consumption levels for those who have lost part or all of their income to the quarantine.Like other central bankers, we in Ukraine can only provide a favorable monetary environment andease financial market conditions.But this is a good question to ask, and the corona crisis has given it special relevance. We willhave two days to discuss, in particular, how monetary policy affects economic inequality andwhether economic inequality should be among a central bank’s goals. And as we talk about it, weshould find the answer to the most fundamental question: is the dual mandate of central banksjustified, or is it more appropriate to focus on inflation?Thank you for your attention. I wish you fresh ideas and interesting discussions! 4 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
            I am grateful to Gregory Kidd for his help in writing this speech, and to Andrew Bailey,  James Benford, Christine Boykiw, Ben Broadbent, Nicholas Butt, Rohan Churm, Victoria Cleland, Amber Evans, Michael Foster, Richard Gordon, Sarah Hall, Andrew Harley, Ronan Hodge,  Al Hughes, Lance Jones, Adam Newell, Will Parry, Rhys Phillips, Jo Place, Eugenia Planas,  Dave Ramsden and Tim Taylor for their advice, comments and guidance.    All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 1      Seven Moments in Spring: Covid-19, financial markets and the Bank of England’s balance sheet operations  Speech given by Andrew Hauser, Executive Director, Markets  Bloomberg, London 4 June 2020 
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 2  2   Introduction  I have always had a funny feeling about Friday the 13th – and 13 March 2020, Mark Carney’s last day in the office as Governor of the Bank of England, was no exception.    Two days earlier, on Wednesday 11 March, the Bank and HM Treasury had launched an unprecedentedly comprehensive package of measures to respond to the rapidly growing economic consequences of the spread of Covid-19.  Hailed globally as a shining example of how monetary, fiscal and regulatory policies could work together to reinforce one another, the combination of interest rate cuts, government spending, cheap funding and capital easing measures seemed sure to stabilise markets and restore some much-needed confidence to households and businesses.  So it cannot have been hugely welcome when, on Friday morning, with the removal vans waiting outside,  I suggested the Bank’s Governors needed to meet again before the weekend. The previous day had seen disorderly conditions in the US Treasury market and the largest one-day fall in equity prices since the 1987 crash, despite major new policy announcements from the Federal Reserve and ECB.  As I ran through my gloomy update, it was clear that further action would be needed – but perhaps not at that stage quite how much more.  Monday morning would be no quiet start for Andrew Bailey, the new Governor.  In my remarks today, I want to give a bird’s eye’s view of what happened in those extraordinary weeks, and the steps we took – either in concert with others, or using our own balance sheet – to neutralise the sudden pre-lockdown 'dash for cash' – the biggest test of core market functioning and resilience since the Great Financial Crisis (GFC) of 2008-9.  Judged solely against that narrow yardstick, central bank actions – unprecedented in scale and speed – were successful in averting a market meltdown.  Commercial banks, strengthened by the post-GFC reforms, have continued to lend, supported by a range of public sector schemes.  And we learned some surprisingly positive things about operating a financial system remotely – both in terms of market resilience, but also in terms of diversity and inclusion.    But this is no time for self-congratulation.  The broader aspects of the Covid-19 crisis – medical, social, economic, and personal – remain hugely challenging, and involve a much wider set of actors than central banks alone.  Further financial instability cannot be ruled out.  And the sheer scale of the balance sheet interventions necessary in recent months pose important longer term questions.  About the extent to which the non-bank financial system may still be capable of amplifying instability – for example through sudden non-bank deleveraging, runs on money market funds, or rigidities in dealer intermediation.  And about the appropriate balance of responsibilities between the public and private sector for dealing with such vulnerabilities. 
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 3  3   I cannot give comprehensive answers to these questions today.  But, in what follows, I have tried to provide some raw material for that exercise, illustrated using seven of the most vivid ‘moments’ from my own experience of the past few weeks.  Moment 1:  the first rumbles of thunder  In the first week of March – the week before that fateful Friday 13th – we at the Bank had decided to move all of our market operations to full split site working, to reduce the risk of Covid-19 transmission. On Friday 6 March, as I was walking across the trading floor saying goodbye, my attention was drawn to a group of our foreign exchange reserves managers staring intently at their screens and talking animatedly.  A big adjustment in financial markets had already been underway for some time, as expectations of slower demand caused by the global spread of the virus pulled down on equity and oil prices, and investors moved into safer assets, reducing yields (Chart 1).  Market functioning had however mostly held up well.    In recent days, however, something had changed.  Wednesday had seen a sharp intraday rise in yields on US Treasury bonds (USTs) – normally one of the deepest and most liquid markets in the world – amidst a big pickup in market volumes.  Then, on Friday morning, yields on 30-year USTs fell by 7 basis points in less than 15 minutes.  More worryingly, other normally reliable relationships between USTs and related financial instruments had begun to unravel.  What seemed to be happening was that financial transactions that normally helped to stabilise UST markets had gone into reverse, becoming stress-amplifiers.  In recent years, hedge funds and other leveraged investors had taken on the role of maintaining so-called ‘arbitrage relationships’ between financial instruments that should trade in line with one another.  They did this in a number of ways – but a particularly popular trade involved the so-called ‘futures basis’:  buying USTs, funded by repo, and selling bond futures to large asset managers eager to pick up return.  These trades were conducted at thin margins and high rates of leverage.1  The sharp pickup in asset price volatility, as markets struggled to process the news about the onset of the virus, increased margin calls – forcing funds to unwind some of their basis trades, selling USTs to generate cash.  Initially these trades were conducted quietly.  But as time went on, their speed and size – running to hundreds of billions of dollars – began to overwhelm dealers’ intermediation capacity, which was itself shrinking as the result of rising volatility and the operational challenges of remote working.  Rising transaction costs and the breakdown in arbitrage relationships began feeding on themselves:  a classic ‘doom loop’ (Chart 2).  What was unique about this process, and potentially disastrous for the financial system, was that even the highest quality government assets were not good enough.  Just like high street companies facing                                                       1 Leverage rates of 40-60 times were common, but anecdotal reports suggest some ran much higher.  
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 4  4   evaporating revenues, market participants needed cash.  In the days that followed, this so-called ‘dash for cash’ would spread to every corner of the global financial system.  Chart 1: US equity prices and bond yields  Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P. and Bank calculations. Displayed as changes year to date.  Chart 2:  The ‘dash for cash’ in US Treasuries  Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P, Eikon by Refinitiv.and Bank calculations. Bid/offer spreads are 5 day moving averages.   Moment 2:  a global response to dollar shortages  Monday 9 March was another day of turmoil in financial markets:  oil prices fell by 30%, equity prices by 8% and there were further sharp moves in UST yields.  Just after 9pm that evening, we received an email from the Federal Reserve:  could the dollar swap line central banks speak the following morning?  The dollar swap lines may be the most important part of the international financial stability safety net that few have ever heard of.    Global trade and investment relies on the dollar.  In normal times, firms and local banks located outside the United States can easily secure these dollars using FX swaps, provided by international banks with access to US markets, to exchange their local currency for dollars.  In times of turbulence, however, these markets can become impaired, or even seize up altogether, as the international banks batten down the hatches.  Trading firms who cannot secure dollars will either have to cease trading altogether, or try to raise dollars in other ways, for example by liquidating dollar-denominated assets.  That selling pressure, if allowed to take hold, could trigger, or amplify, global financial instability.  9 Mar: Start of ‘dash for cash’-35-30-25-20-15-10-505-150-130-110-90-70-50-30-1010Jan 20Feb 20Mar 20Apr 20May 20Jun 20Basis pointsPer centUST 10y yield (RHS)S&P 500 (LHS)Brent Crude (LHS)6 Mar23 Mar: Federal Reserve announces further measures-2002040608010012014000.40.81.21.622.42.83.2Jan 20Feb 20Mar 20Apr 20May 20Basis pointsUST 30y bid/offer spread (RHS)UST swap spread 30y, inverted (LHS)UST 10y cash-futures basis (LHS)15 Mar: USD swaplinerate and maturity enhancedBasis points
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 5  5   That Monday night, the first signs of such stress were starting to emerge:  the dash for cash had reached FX markets.  Falling asset prices and rising panic about the outlook were boosting offshore dollar demand.  But international banks’ capacity (and willingness) to meet this demand was becoming impaired – raising the cost of local dollar funding relative to that available to onshore US firms.  That divergence was particularly marked in Japan (green line in Chart 3).  Chart 3:  Onshore and offshore rates for 3m dollar funding   Sources: Bloomberg and Bank calculations.  Offshore funding calculations use FX swaps referencing 3 month Libor. The dotted light blue line indicates that prior to the 15 March 2020, swap lines were only offered at a 1-week, not 3 month, maturity.  Chart 4:  Dollar swaps outstanding   Sources: Bloomberg, Federal Reserve and Bank calculations. ‘Other’ includes:  Reserve Bank of Australia, Banco Central do Brasil, Danmarks Nationalbank, Bank of Korea, Banco de Mexico, Norges Bank, Reserve Bank of New Zealand, Monetary Authority of Singapore, and Sveriges Riksbank.   This was just the scenario for which the swap lines had been designed.  Put in place after the GFC, the standing swap lines allow five major central banks (The Bank of England, Bank of Japan, ECB, Swiss National Bank and Bank of Canada) to lend dollars to their local banks, confident in the knowledge that they can back those loans with dollars secured from the Federal Reserve, short-circuiting any market dysfunction.  Most of the standing swap line central banks, including the Bank of England, provide weekly dollar auctions backed by the swap lines.  But take up is usually minimal, because the auctions are intended only to be backstops when markets are working normally, and priced accordingly.  But that was not the situation we faced in March.  Over the days following that first call, as market conditions deteriorated further, we agreed on a package of measures to mobilise the swap lines more fully:  extending the maturity, reducing the price, and increasing the frequency of our operations to ensure that dollars 15 Mar: Swaplinerate and maturity enhanced9 Mar0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.5Feb 20Mar 20Apr 20May 20Jun 20Per centOIS +[25bps to 50bps]Central bank USD swap line rateOnshore via USD LIBOROffshore via EUROffshore via JPYOffshore via GBP20 Mar: Swaplinefrequency increased20 Mar: Swaplinefrequency increased0100200300400500600700Mar 20Apr 20May 20$ bnOtherBank of CanadaSwiss National BankBank of EnglandBank of JapanEuropean Central BankTotal15 Mar: Swaplinerate and maturity enhanced20 Mar: Frequency increased23 Mar: Federal Reserve announces further measures0100200300400500600700Mar.20Apr.20May.20USD bn2007200920112013
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 6  6   continued to flow.  The first part of this package was announced on Sunday 15 March, and further extended on 20 March.  The Federal Reserve also agreed temporary arrangements with a further nine central banks.  The expanded swap lines have since been used heavily, with the stock of dollar borrowing approaching  $½ trillion – by far the highest usage since the GFC (Chart 4).  Pressures in sterling and euro FX swap markets (measured by the gap between onshore and offshore dollar rates) fell back rapidly.  Yen markets took a little longer to normalise.  But all of the major onshore and offshore dollar rates are now back within tight ranges of one another (Chart 3).  Moment 3:  dysfunction spreads to the gilt market  Would the dash for cash engulf the UK gilt market too?  It seemed distinctly possible – the gilt functioning indicators we monitor had started turning red2 as the week progressed, and by Friday 13th we were hearing ‘you’ll be next’ warnings from anxious funds.  On the other hand, leveraged trading in gilts was less prevalent than in USTs.  And the Federal Reserve’s announcement on Sunday 15 March of an eye-popping $500bn (later unlimited) asset purchase programme to support market functioning and meet the global need for cash was seen as a game-changer by some.  Any misplaced optimism on that front would be short-lived.  Gilt markets may have taken a little longer to react – but they were not immune.  As a new week began, selling pressure continued to drive yields up sharply (Chart 5), and functioning worsened further (Chart 6).  When the sterling exchange rate juddered sharply lower on Wednesday 18 March, reaching levels against the dollar not seen since the mid-1980s and triggering big new margin calls amidst speculation about a UK lockdown, any hope of relying on US actions alone to stabilise global market functioning had gone.  As one of the safest sterling assets, gilts underpin every aspect of the UK economy; provide a benchmark for other borrowing rates, and hence are vital to the transmission of monetary policy.  With the economic outlook worsening sharply, and gilt market conditions in freefall, the Monetary Policy Committee voted on 19 March – less than 24 hours after the onset of critical market stress – to purchase an additional £200bn of gilts and sterling corporate bonds ‘as soon as operationally possible’.  This was by far the largest and fastest single programme ever launched:  equivalent to around a tenth of UK GDP, or 50% of the MPC’s existing holdings, and more than twice as rapid as the opening salvo of purchases in 2009.  The impact was immediate, and decisive.  Gilt yields fell back sharply as confidence returned, and market functioning measures began to normalise (Charts 5-6).  Purchase operations have since taken place smoothly, with good participation and tight pricing.                                                         2 ‘Red’ in this context meaning the 95th percentile of levels seen since the GFC. 
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 7  7   Chart 5:  Gilt yields  Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P., TradeWeb and Bank calculations  Chart 6:  Bid/offer spreads on gilts   Source: Eikon by Refinitiv   Moment 4:  congestion in sterling money markets  When our sterling desk received a call from a large asset manager to let us know that – highly unusually – it had been unable to liquidate its holdings of bank certificates of deposit (CDs) to meet a margin call, we knew the dash for cash had reached the sterling money markets.  The coming days brought stories of companies and local authorities also seeking liquidity – whether through greater borrowing3, selling assets, or drawing down their holdings in sterling money market funds (MMFs).  MMFs play an important part in the story, because they act as a bridge between depositors’ desire for immediate liquidity and banks’ desire for term wholesale funding:  providing the former with on-demand cash, while holding a significant share of their assets in banks’ term liabilities, including commercial paper (CP) and CDs.  In total, sterling MMFs saw outflows of some £25bn, or 10% of their total assets, in the eight days between 12 and 20 March (Chart 7).  At first, they met these outflows by running down cash holdings.  But as the outflows intensified, the MMFs tried to liquidate some of their CDs and CP, only to find, just as we’d heard, that the market was effectively closed.  As MMF liquid asset ratios fell towards regulatory thresholds, we faced the prospect of one or more MMFs deciding to ‘gate’ access to investors, cutting off their access to liquidity in the fund – something that some feared could trigger further contagion.                                                        3 The drawdown by Boeing of a $13.8bn syndicated loan facility on Wednesday 11 March was a particularly widely-cited example in global markets. -0.200.20.40.60.811.21.41.6Jan 20Feb 20Mar 20Apr 20May 20Jun 20Per cent5 year10 year30 year19 Mar: Further BoE package (Bank rate cut 15bps and additional £200bn asset purchases)19 Mar: Further BoE package00.40.81.21.622.42.83.23.64Jan 20Feb 20Mar 20Apr 20May 20Jun 20Basis points5 year10 year30 year
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 8  8   As demand for cash grew, but supply failed to respond, sterling money market rates rose sharply (Chart 8).  Though sharpest at longer tenors, we also saw a pickup in overnight repo rates:  a particularly serious sign of dysfunction, and a challenge to our commitment to keep such rates broadly aligned to Bank Rate.  Chart 7:  MMF outflows and assets  Sources: Crane Data LLC and Bank calculations  Chart 8:  Sterling money market spreads  Source: Bank of England Sterling Money Market data collection and Bank calculations. Overnight rate for cleared Delivery by Value transactions; 3-month repo rate uses only transactions estimated to be non-nettable under leverage ratio rules. Both rates volume-weighted and stated from perspective of dealers.  Two key sets of policy actions helped to ease pressure on money market rates.  First, the MPC’s decision on 19 March to buy gilts in large size – coupled with similar policy actions by other central banks – helped stabilise broader markets, reducing the incidence of margin calls, and triggering renewed inflows into MMFs and the money markets more generally.  And, second, the Bank activated its Contingent Term Repo Facility (CTRF) on 24 March, committing to lend unlimited amounts of sterling at close to Bank Rate, against a broad range of collateral.  These operations, together with the passing of the March quarter end, brought repo rates back to more normal levels (Chart 8).    By contrast, term LIBOR measures took much longer to subside, in both dollar and sterling markets (Charts 3 and 8).  In part that reflected the persistent illiquidity in the market for CP, CD and other unsecured bank paper.  But that same illiquidity, coupled with the sharp reduction in the size of the market since the GFC, also meant that, throughout the crisis, LIBOR was based on few if any direct underlying transactions (Chart 9).4  That is a wholly unsatisfactory basis for a benchmark that still underpins a substantial share of global                                                       4 Libor submissions are classified in three levels.  Level 1 is ‘transaction-based’ submissions — an average of transactions in unsecured deposits and primary issuances of commercial paper and certificates of deposit.  Level 2 is ‘transaction-derived’ data, including information from historical transactions.  Level 3 is ‘expert judgement’ — where a panel bank has insufficient Level 1 or 2 transactions, it estimates the rate at which it could fund itself in the unsecured wholesale funding market, based on an approved procedure.  Further details are available at:  www.theice.com/publicdocs/ICE_LIBOR_Methodology.pdf  210220230240250260270Mar 20Apr 20May 20-3-2-101234Daily flow (RHS)Assets under management (LHS)Percent£bn‘Dash for cash’24 Mar: CTRF announced19 Mar:Further BoE package24 Mar: CTRF announced31 Mar: Quarter-end-20020406080100Jan 20Feb 20Mar 20Apr 20May 20Basis pointsOvernight reverse repo - Bank rate spread3-month reverse repo-OIS spread3-month £LIBOR-OIS spread
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 9  9   corporate borrowing, and underscores the pressing need to complete the transition away from LIBOR by end-2021.  By contrast, volumes underpinning SONIA, the market’s preferred alternative sterling risk free rate, rose sharply, as investors sought safer havens.  Chart 9:  3m £LIBOR submission composition  Source: IBA. See footnote 4 in the text for definitions of the data shown.  Chart 10:  CCFF usage and capacity  Source: Bank of England.  Dashed lines show linear interpolation between launch date and first public data release.  Moment 5: keeping funding flowing to UK companies  Although most of my remarks have been about stabilising the financial system, the ‘dash for cash’ was of course just as prevalent in the corporate sector – and the stakes just as real.  Otherwise-viable companies, cut off from their normal sources of income but still needing to meet salaries, rent and taxes, feared losing access to finance, forcing them to eat into their cash buffers or start winding themselves up.  So:  another day, another mission.  This time in the form of an urgent email, on Sunday 15 March – the day before Andrew Bailey formally took over as Governor.  Bank and Treasury, at the highest levels, had agreed to launch a package of financing measures to help struggling UK companies.  Much of that help would be provided via the banks, supported by Government guarantee.  But to free up capacity at the banks to focus on those who needed them most – including small and medium-sized companies – the Bank would provide marketable debt to the largest, highest-rated firms.  Given the credit risks involved, financial exposures and eligibility decisions would be owned by the Treasury, but the scheme – to be known as the Covid Corporate Credit Facility (CCFF) – would be designed and run by the Bank, and funded through the issuance of reserves, with the MPC’s agreement.  0102030405060708090100Oct 19Dec 19Feb 20Per centTransaction-basedTransaction-derivedExpert judgement‘Dash for cash’01020304050607023 Mar06 Apr20 Apr04 May18 May£ bnCommercial paper purchases under CCFF, lessredemptionsCCFF drawing capacity
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 10  10   Time was of the essence.  The package of measures was announced by the Chancellor 48 hours later, on Tuesday 17 March.  And a mere six days after that, on Monday 23 March, the CCFF was open for business:  allowing investment grade firms to issue Commercial Paper (CP), via an agent bank, to the Bank at pre-Covid rates.  No public sector scheme can ever reach every firm in need.  But the numbers are substantial.  Firms eligible for the scheme account for over a quarter of UK corporate turnover and nearly a fifth of UK employment.  So far, over 140 firms have signed up for the scheme, and have borrowed over £20bn in total, some of which has already matured.  Firms’ borrowing capacity in the scheme is more than three times that level (Chart 10), helping to underpin confidence – and complementing the Government-run schemes, including the Coronavirus Business Interruption and Bounce Back Loan (BBL) Schemes, which together have lent a further £31bn.  Central bank facilities are generally designed to support, rather than replace, market mechanisms – and here too the CCFF has brought benefits.  First, CP issuance under the scheme has been at least three times larger than the size of the pre-Covid-19 sterling CP market – and nearly three quarters of CCFF firms have set up a CP programme since applying.  So the CCFF has helped to deepen the CP market, with potentially lasting benefits.  And, second, the normalisation of conditions in core markets, coupled with the restart of the MPC’s sterling corporate bond purchases on 7 April and similar schemes operated by the ECB and Federal Reserve, has allowed many larger firms to return to private debt markets, reducing the need of some to draw on schemes like the CCFF.  Indeed, UK firms’ debt issuance has been running materially ahead of the average in previous years (Chart 11).  In addition to the CCFF, the Bank also opened the borrowing window for the new Term Funding Scheme with additional incentives for Small and Medium Sized Enterprises (TFSME) on 15 April.  The TFSME is designed to help bridge the supply of credit to UK firms through the Covid-19 disruption and reinforce the transmission of the MPC’s reductions in Bank Rate.  It does this by providing banks with cheap funding over a four-year term (rising to six years for loans guaranteed under the BBL scheme).  There has already been £12bn of lending from the scheme – a far more rapid pace than the previous TFS (Chart 12).    
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 11  11   Chart 11:  UK investment grade bond issuance  Source: Refinitiv — Deals Business Intelligence and Bank calculations. Data show UK private non-financial corporate issuance in sterling, euro and US dollar.  Chart 12:  TFSME and TFS lending compared  Source: Bank of England   Moment 6: where there’s a Means there a Way  The scale and uncertainty of the economic downturn, combined with the sharp deterioration in financial market conditions in mid-March raised another issue:  how to manage the Government’s cashflow needs, but in markets that at the time seemed to be barely functioning?  And that’s how, at the height of the crisis, I found myself on another call, this time with the Treasury and its Debt Management Office (DMO), to discuss the ‘Ways & Means (W&M) account’ – in modern language, the Government’s overdraft facility at the Bank of England, funded by reserves creation.  W&M sits at the very bottom of the hierarchy of tools used to meet the Government’s borrowing needs.   The primary tool is gilt issuance – for many years used by the DMO to ‘fully fund’ those needs over the medium term (usually a fiscal year).  Because government cash flows are not perfectly predictable, ‘rough tuning’ is achieved through the issuance of marketable Treasury Bills.  And ‘fine-tuning’ is done through the money markets. The W&M exists purely as a back-up to those fine-tuning operations.    Given these multiple alternative tools, W&M had seen no material usage in over a decade (Chart 13).  But clearly the period of dysfunction in gilt and money markets in March and early April raised the possibility that it might be needed if all of the other alternatives were temporarily rendered ineffective.  Working together, the UK authorities’ challenge was to remind financial markets that its sole purpose was as a temporary, short term cash management tool to smooth cashflows, and not in any way intended as a more lasting replacement for gilt issuance as the Government’s primary financing source:  something that could 19 Mar: Further BoE package051015202530354045JanFebMarAprMay$ bn20202016-2019 average051015202530354045500510152025£ bnWeeksLoans made through the TFS (starting September 2016)Loans made through the TFSME (starting April 2020)
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 12  12   complicate the execution of monetary policy.  Those principles were embodied in a public announcement released on 9 April.    In the event, the rapid normalisation of market conditions allowed the Government to announce, and so far meet, sharply higher near-term gilt issuance plans (Chart 14) without any need for recourse to the  Ways & Means account.  The account remains available for use, if unexpected future cash needs cannot be met by any other market-based means, e.g. because of a renewed period of dysfunction.  But in such circumstances, the usage would be short term; and, as soon as possible before the end of the year, the DMO would scale up its market operations to repay the W&M balance.  Chart 13:  Usage of the Ways & Means account   Source: Bank of England.  Available here  Chart 14:  DMO funding plans compared  Source: DMO and Bank Calculations. Past values adjusted for inflation (April 2020 equivalents).  Moment 7:  central banking on the home front  Table 1 and Chart 15 summarise the scale of the Bank’s recent balance sheet operations: a balance sheet that has expanded by almost a third in three months, and will reach nearly 40% of annual UK GDP by  mid-year.  To deliver that, we are doing more than ten times the number of weekly operations than in the  pre-Covid19 period (Chart 16).  This is eye-popping by itself.  But, more extraordinary still, virtually all of it has been done remotely – hundreds of billions of pounds worth of operations delivered from peoples’ bedrooms, attics and kitchens, whilst isolated on their own, or caring for children and other relatives.  The Bank has long embraced home working as part of its flexible working arrangements – but the sheer scale of what has been done – what we have had to do – would frankly never have been contemplated by choice.  Preparation began early – and the 051015202520062008201020122014201620182020£ bn050100150200250300350JanFebMarAprMayJunJulAugSepOctNovDec£ bn20092016-2019 average20202020 (DMO announced)
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 13  13   technology that enables all of our critical operational functions, and the operational and risk controls that go with them, were quickly re-configured to support working from home.  By the time of the MPC’s first policy package on 11 March, we were already operating on a fully-live split-site basis.  And by the time the CCFF and the MPC’s second round of asset purchases got under way in earnest, the UK-wide lockdown was underway – and nearly all of us were working from home.  Table 1:  The Bank’s operations since 1.3.20  Source: Bank of England Chart 15:  The Bank’s balance sheet (%GDP)  Source: Bank of England, available here.  Dotted line extends series to mid-2020, assuming completion of current asset purchase programme.  Just as our operations have had to adjust, at speed, so too has the way we interact with one other.  Face-to-face meetings – the lifeblood of central banking, sadly – have been seamlessly replaced with audio and video calls.  Indeed, over 12,000 of them every day (Chart 17)!  The challenges we have faced are minor compared with those of healthcare professionals and other key workers in recent months – and many other organisations have achieved similar feats.  But for an institution as traditional as the Bank of England, the experience has been profound.           Stock outstanding Change since 1 MarchPeak stock level since 1 MarchILTR28+21281 & 3 Month CTRF6+611USD swaplines23+2337APF Gilts556+121556APF CBPS14+514CCFF19+1920TFSME12+1212TFS (closed) 107-107FLS (closed)2-2Total769+207Asset PurchasesFunding  Schemes GBP bn (as at 27 May)Liquidity Facilities05101520253035401700175018001850190019502000Per centSouth Sea bubbleWW1WW2Amalgamation of Treasury and Bank note issuesFailure of Lehman BrothersBanknote convertibility to gold suspendedBanknote convertibility to gold reinstatedCovid-19 crisis
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 14  14   Chart 16:  no. of market operations per week  Source: Bank of England Chart 17:  The impact of remote working  Source: Bank of England  What have we learned?  Some (very) tentative lessons  The Covid-19 crisis is very far from over.  The medical and economic challenges we face are huge and potentially persistent – and many are not for central banks to resolve.  Against that backdrop, I have covered only one aspect of our actions during the crisis:  the steps we took to prevent the initial shock, and the uncertainty that came with it, from threatening monetary and financial stability.    Let’s take the good news first.  The central banking response was bigger, faster, and more comprehensively co-ordinated with domestic and international partners than ever before.  We deployed the tools developed since the GFC – extending the dollar swap lines, the CTRF, the TFSME and asset purchases.  And the banking system, with much stronger capital and liquidity reserves, continued to lend – supported by new schemes such as the CCFF, built from scratch in record time.  In designing our interventions, we have been careful to demarcate clearly between our respective institutional responsibilities:  the MPC took the decisions on asset purchases; the Treasury bore the financial risk on lending to corporates; and we reminded financial markets that any usage of the Ways & Means account would be temporary and short term.  In light of those actions, and similar steps by other central banks globally, core markets are today stable and well-functioning.  That is no small achievement.   But it is far too soon to take a lap of honour, even on the narrow stage I have occupied today.  Financial markets could come under strain again, if there is another leg to the global infection cycle, or if economic data come out persistently worse than expected.  And even if – as hoped – we escape that, the sheer scale of our interventions means we must, in time, ask ourselves hard questions about the financial markets we 01020304028 Feb13 Mar27 Mar10 Apr24 Apr08 May22 MayNo. of ops per weekContingent Term Repo Facility (CTRF)Indexed Long-Term Repo (ILTR)Term Funding Scheme with additional incentives for SMEs (TFSME)Asset Purchase Facility - Corporate Bonds & GiltsCovid Corporate Financing Facility (CCFF)US dollar swaplines05001000150020002500300002000400060008000100001200014000Mar.20Apr.20May.20AttendanceCalls per day Audio/video calls bank wide (RHS)Attendance in Threadneedle Street office (LHS)11 Mar:Bank rate cut19 Mar: Bank rate cut23 Mar:Lockdown begins
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 15  15   rely upon, and their potential to amplify the sort of ‘dash for cash’ we saw in March and April.  Based on what I’ve said today, let me identify four such questions:  - First, do we understand why intermediaries struggled to make effective markets in core government bond, money and foreign exchange instruments at crucial moments during the crisis?  Was it simply the sheer scale of the shock, combined with the operational challenges of remote working?  Or did regulatory constraints also play a role?  If there are circumstances where our traditional counterparties aren’t able to intermediate, do we need to fix that at source?  Or do central banks need to change the design of their balance sheet facilities more profoundly to fill that gap?  - Second, are we comfortable with the central role played by highly-leveraged but thinly-capitalised non-banks in arbitraging between key financial markets, if the unwinding of those trades can amplify instability so starkly?  - Third, how do we deal with the risks posed to financial stability by the structural tendency for Money Market and some other open-ended funds to be prone to runs, without having to commit scarce public money to costly support facilities?   - And, fourth, how can we ensure timely transition away from LIBOR, whose weaknesses were highlighted so starkly by the crisis?   The Bank’s Financial Policy Committee will be reflecting on these and other issues in the months ahead.   Closer to home, there are lessons too for us in some of the ways of working that we’ve been forced to explore whilst in lockdown.  Some roles have undoubtedly been made harder:  for example those involving the control of operational risk.  But it has also forced us to exploit the benefits of technology in ways that many of us would never have dared do voluntarily.  It has embedded flexible working in a far deeper way than before.  It has brought a new understanding and respect for the challenges many staff have to deal with.  It has given us back the many hours spent in mindless or stressful commuting.  And, perhaps most profoundly of all, it has been a great leveller.  Meetings conducted by video- or audio-conference have been more orderly – even if they are also more likely to be interrupted by over-exuberant children or misfiring wifi!  Ideas and contributions matter more than who is making them, or how they are made.  And we’ve become more inclusive, allowing us to share material in real time, bringing each other in and virtually raising our hands to talk.  I am not sure that many people would have predicted that a global pandemic might end up being the thing that finally really moves the dial on diversity and inclusion.  What I can say with some confidence is that it has been a privilege to lead the Bank’s markets function during this extraordinary period, and I look forward to discussing some of the themes I have outlined here with you further now. 
Elvira Nabiullina: Review of recent inflation developments in Russiaand economic outlookStatement by Ms Elvira Nabiullina, Governor of the Bank of Russia, in the follow-up to the Boardof Directors meeting, Moscow, 24 April 2020.*   *   *Today, the Board of Directors has decided to cut the key rate by 50 bp to 5.50%per annum. This implies that we have switched to accommodative monetary policy.Moreover, we hold open the prospect of further key rate reduction if the situationdevelops in line with the updated baseline forecast of the Bank of Russia.Our today’s decision is based on the profound revision of our view of economic developmentand inflation trends in the next three years.Since the last Board of Directors’ revision of the key rate, three events have happened whichhave defined our view of the situation. They are primarily associated with the spreadof the coronavirus pandemic. Firstly, this is a drastic decline in the global economy. Secondly,there has been another round of a slump in oil prices, despite the new OPEC+ deal. Thirdly,the Government has introduced nation-wide restrictions. As a result, a large numberof businesses have suspended their operations or switched to the remote work mode.A lot of citizens are currently in self-isolation.As to positive factors, I would focus on a slight stabilisation in global financial marketsas compared to March, which was largely driven by measures being implemented by the centralbanks of reserve-currency countries.Therefore, given all the developments, we have completely reviewed our economic forecast.Our today’s decision relies exactly on the forecast, and not on the latest statisticswe are receiving. The statistics still show the previous month’s situation and cannot providea clear view to estimate further trends. Building our forecast, we were rather taking into accountleading indicators of the economic situation, including data on electric power consumption,financial flows, household spending, as well as the experience of other countries wherethe pandemic has been spreading for a longer period.I will now dwell on the main assumptions behind our baseline forecast.Our forecast relies on a conservative view of oil prices, especially in 2020. We assume that theywill be slowly growing from the average level of USD 15 per barrel in the second quarterto USD 25 per barrel in the fourth quarter. There are large oil stocks accumulated, with a downfallin global demand. This will limit the recovery of oil prices, even if the new OPEC+ agreementis fully complied with. Further on, oil prices are expected to gradually rise to USD 45 per barrelin 2022 as global demand picks up and oil stock levels decrease.Another key assumption of our forecast is the duration of the coronavirus pandemicand the restrictions implemented in Russia and abroad. Our estimates suggest thatgovernments will be gradually lifting or considerably easing the majority of current restrictionsin the second quarter. In this case, we can expect that in the third and fourth quarters economicactivity will be recovering quarter-on-quarter.The economic situation will be returning to normal step-by-step. The direct adverse impactof the restrictions primarily falls on this quarter, while their secondary effects will continueto manifest in the future. According to our surveys, over 80% of the businesses across variousindustries have been experiencing the influence of the coronavirus pandemic and current 1 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
restrictions. Companies’ business sentiment has materially declined. It will take time to restorebusiness processes, logistics and production chains, offset the reduction in profit and revenue,build up reserves and savings that have been used to a greater or lesser extent over the secondquarter. Combined with uncertainty regarding potential changes in the external environment, thiswill limit production, investment and consumer activity. In these conditions, GDP will shrink year-on-year in the third and fourth quarters, that is the annual rate of economic growth willbe negative.According to the Bank of Russia’s forecast, GDP will overall decrease by 4–6% in 2020.The major contributor to this reduction will be a decline in exports that may reachfrom 10% to 15%. Moreover, fixed capital investment will also substantially decrease (by 6–10%) compared to the previous year. Companies will be primarily using their financial resourcesto restore their daily operations. Uncertainty about the prospects of domestic and externaldemand will be confining investment plans. The decline in production and investments willbe confining the opportunities for an upturn in income. Consumer demand will be shrinking.The measures implemented by the Government and the Bank of Russia will supportthe economy, and specifically the most affected industries.Economic growth in 2021–2022 will largely be recovery-type. According to our forecast, GDP willexpand by 3–5% in 2021 and by 1.5–3.5% in 2022. GDP growth will be promoted by a furtherimplementation of national projects. However, our baseline forecast factors in only the alreadyeffective budget support measures.An upturn in the economy and domestic demand will also be driven by the easing of monetaryconditions resulting from the monetary policy pursued. This will support lending, and its growthrate will rise from 3–8% this year to 6–11% in 2021–2022. The lending potential will alsobe maintained owing to the regulatory easing and the expansion of the Bank of Russia’sspecialised refinancing instruments.According to our estimates, the easing of monetary policy is needed to maintainannual inflation close to 4% over the forecast horizon. The slump in domestic and externaldemand this year will be considerably containing inflation, which induces the risk of its substantialdeviation downwards from the target in 2021 and over a medium-term horizon if no additionalmonetary policy measures are introduced.The disinflationary pressure of weak demand will offset the effect of temporary proinflationaryfactors, that is, the ruble weakening and the observed elevated demand for individual products,already this year. We believe that a rise in inflation expectations caused by the above factors willalso be temporary.We expect that the impact of limited demand on inflation will be stable and long-lasting. Giventhe transmission lag of monetary policy, we should take actions already now. Basedon our forecast, annual inflation will reach 3.8–4.8% by the end of the year amid the easingof monetary policy, and will further on stabilise close to 4%. Moreover, we expect a reversalof inflation trends in the middle of the year. Monthly inflation in annualised terms will beginto go down, while annual inflation will still continue to rise.As to the balance of payments, we expect that the current account balance will declineto negative values in 2020 and 2021 (to USD 35 and 18 billion respectively). This will mainlyresult from the slump in exports caused by the reduction in external demand and in exportrevenues, primarily from oil sales.I would like to point that the temporary switch to a current account deficit is an expected effectproduced by the considerable oil price downturn under the influence of the fiscal rule. Receiptsfrom fiscal rule-based foreign currency sales make it possible to support the economyand domestic consumption. In this situation, imports are contracting to a lower degree compared 2 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
to exports driven by the decline in oil prices. As a result, the current account balance will dropto negative values. In 2022, when the oil price exceeds the cut-off level, the current accountbalance will return to positive territory and the accumulation of reserves will be resumed via fiscalrule-based foreign currency purchases.We do not expect a noticeable change in the private sector financial account balance overthe forecast horizon. According to our estimates, the private sector financial account deficit willreduce from USD 18 billion in 2019 to USD 15 billion this year. This is linked to decline in GDP,decrease in economic revenues, as well as less possibilities for borrowing in foreign marketsat the end of the first quarter — the start of the second quarter amid intensified volatilityand uncertainty. Further ahead, as global markets stabilise, the potential for external bollowingswill recover and this will pass through to a reduction in the private sector financial account deficitto USD 10 billion in 2021–2022.This baseline scenario, without doubt, has many uncertainty factors. They concern boththe duration of the restrictions in Russia and worldwide, and the pace of recovery of the globaland Russian economies. Besides, new spikes of volatility may occur in global financialand commodity markets. Therefore, in our discussions of the key rate decision and its path,we have a proper regard to the objective of sustaining financial stability.As I noted, the baseline forecast incorporates only the fiscal decisions already madeby the Government. We assume that further on the situation may require additional decisionsto support the economy. This will foster an alleviation of effects of the restrictions for householdsand businesses, accelerate the return of economic activity to normal, and also mitigate the risksof inflation deviation downwards from the target over the next quarters. In the courseof our key rate discussions, we considered model estimates of the influence of such additionalfiscal measures on GDP, inflation and the monetary policy path.We will certainly consider possible developments in fiscal policy, in the Russian and globaleconomies in the course of further adjustments of our baseline scenario. Nonetheless,our current analysis suggests that virtually all possible scenario variants allow for monetarypolicy easing, including amid a certain additional expansion of fiscal measures designedto support the economy.The Board of Directors proceeds from the existing potential for cuttingthe key rate and discussed possible options at the current and next meetings. The discussionconcluded that given such extraordinary developments, it may not prove sufficient to adjustour policy by employing the small-step method we used. To return inflation to the targetand stabilise the situation in the economy, we may need to implement more decisive measures.At our today’s meeting we have decided to cut the key rate by 50 bp to 5.50%per annum. We continue to see the potential for the further easing of monetary policy at our nextmeetings.I would also like to note that, given the key rate change, we have decided to cut from 4.0%to 3.5% per annum the interest rate under the new Bank of Russia’s SME lending support facilityintroduced several weeks ago. We believe this will help to additionally improve the affordabilityof loans for small and medium-sized enterprises, which were affected the most by hardships.And a few words in conclusion. The current situation specifically requires timely and evenforward-looking decisions so that we are able not only to curb negative trends in the economy,but also to set grounds for a faster normalisation of the economic situation after the withdrawalof the restrictions. This will influence both inflation dynamics and the economy recovery path.Therefore, the Bank of Russia is monitoring the effects of its earlier decisions promptlyand on an ongoing basis, and stands ready to take further steps, both in the monetary policysphere and in the areas of its activity. 3 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
Fout! Onbekende naam voor documenteigenschap.  1           A green light to lead us on the path of economic recovery  Contribution by Frank Elderson during a satellite event of the 11th edition of the Petersberg Climate Dialogue: Financing Climate Ambition in the context of COVID-19  29 april 2020   Frank Elderson participated in the virtual Petersberg Climate Dialogue side event ‘Financing Climate Ambition in the context of COVIDー19. In his contribution he pointed out three ideas that he thinks are important in order to shape our thinking in terms of recovery measures that should be taken.    
Fout! Onbekende naam voor documenteigenschap.  2  It is a great honour for me to be on this distinguished panel and to join this wonderful conference.   No doubt, at this moment the first priority of governments is halting the spread of the COVID-19 virus. That having been said, the climate crisis has not just suddenly disappeared. The droughts, the floods, the fires, the famine, the refugees, biodiversity loss: unfortunately they are all still there.  At this moment, all around the world, unprecedented stimulus packages are being implemented to keep economies afloat. These amounts run into billions and trillions.  The priority is to of course limit the economic impact of the pandemic crisis unfolding in front of us. That said: Are we going to blindly return to our brown past? Are we going to massively invest in what will, to a large extent, turn out to be stranded assets? If you allow me to put it even more bluntly: are we, in ill-directed attempts to restore the old economy, going to continue to destroy the planet by locking in a 3 degree scenario?  Are we going to squander the very last chance we might have to avoid catastrophic climate change? Of course we should not, of course we must not. And after this conference, I hope and trust we will all say: of course we will not.   In that vein, I would like to point out three ideas that I think are important in order to shape our thinking in terms of recovery measures that should be taken. The three concrete ideas I would like to share are:   Think about public investments. The links that should be made with the climate agenda that is already there. We should frontload already identified green investment programmes such as the EC Green Deal and the Climate Agreement in the Netherlands and many other programmes that are already there. We should make sure that public investment is linked as tight as possible to our climate goals, or more generally to the SDG’s.   Secondly, state aid measures – There are certain sectors in the economy, let me mention aviation that will qualify for state aid. It would be a historic error if we were not to make this aid conditional upon them moving towards a more sustainable future. There is a clear example, after the financial crisis in 2008, President Obama made state aid to car manufactures dependent on them moving towards the electrification of motor cars. That is an example that could now be leveraged on and can be used much more widely.  Third, the pricing of CO2 exposures. This has already been pointed out over the last years many, many times, but it is now more important than ever. What we see is that the ETS price in European Union has now decreased 30%. As of course economic activity has decreased, emissions have decreased as a consequence and therefore demands of emission rights have decreased as well. Hence this decrease in price. What we need to do is give CO2 pricing more teeth. We could think of a floor in the carbon price, we could lower the allowed emission ceilings, we could strengthen the market stabilization mechanism. And we should also phase out harmful subsidies that in fact subsidize carbon intensive sectors, while what we need to do is the exact opposite.     Turning now to the work of the Network for Greening the Financial System. There are 65 central banks and supervisors from all over the world who are members of the NGFS and there are 12 observers that are doing much more than just observing; they are very active. The IMF, World Bank, BIS, OECD and many more. What the membership of 65 in practice means is that three quarters of all the worlds systemically relevant banks, two thirds of all the big insurance undertakings, are being supervised by the membership of the NGFS. This gives us tremendous leverage on the financial sector. The members have a large set of instruments to ensure that what is being said is also being done.   The NGFS will soon release several reports that will help our community of central banks and supervisors take the necessary measures to foster a greener financial system. One is a guide for supervisory practices. We have looked around the NGFS membership and beyond at what supervisors are now already doing in terms of how they supervise financial institutions on ways of managing their climate-related and environmental risks. We have compiled in this guide best 
Fout! Onbekende naam voor documenteigenschap.  3  practices that we have found and we hope that it will help other supervisors to implement these best practices and hence — via the leverage that membership has — it will have an effect on banks and insurance undertakings all around the world. Secondly, this work is spearheaded by the Bank of England, the NGFS focuses on climate-related stress testing, developing reference climate policy scenarios for central banks and supervisors and giving guidance for central banks and supervisors on how to integrate climate risk analyses into macroeconomic and financial stability surveillance, seizing the macro financial impact of these risks. As climate-related risks are nonlinear, will to a large extend manifest themselves in the future and can therefore not be based on historical data, we need to develop forward looking risk management techniques. The third piece focuses on data gaps and disclosures.   Wrapping up, in the run up to COP26, I really want to applaud the COP26 for making the very explicit connection with the financial sector, given the crucial importance of managing financial risks. I want to offer that the NGFS stands ready to do all we can to contribute.   Second, I want to point out the great importance of any financial institution which is not already doing so, to incorporate in the DNA of their financial risk management, the physical and transition risks related to climate change, and even broader to environmental change, biodiversity change, SDG-related change. Any financial institution should make sure it has this long-term view and incorporate it into risk management.   Coming back to the pandemic. People are dying because of the pandemic. The planet is perishing because of unwise policies from us, the people. There is a public health crisis, but there is also a planet health crisis. The planet also needs intensive care. This is the time to apply the lessons drawn from our past mistakes. This is the time to turn the page, this is the time to invest once and for all in a truly sustainable economy.  In these dark days of the pandemic, we must create an avenue of hope, we must switch on the light. Let that light be green.    
Philip Lowe: Opening statement to the Senate Select Committee onCOVID-19Opening statement (via videoconference) by Mr Philip Lowe, Governor of the Reserve Bank ofAustralia, to the Senate Select Committee on COVID-19, 28 May 2020.*   *   *Good morning and thank you for the invitation to appear before this Committee.The past three months have been extraordinary ones in the life of our nation and there has beenan unprecedented policy response.On the economic front, there has been very close coordination between monetary and fiscalpolicy, as there should be at times like this. As part of the RBA’s contribution to dealing with thepandemic, we announced a comprehensive package in mid March. The goal is to support theeconomy by keeping funding costs low and credit available, especially to small and medium-sized businesses.As banker to the Australian Government, the RBA has also processed the many billions of dollarsin government assistance to households and businesses. We have also made sure that thepayments system is working well and that banknote supply is maintained. And we have done thiswith around 90 per cent of our staff working from home.The evidence so far is that our mid-March package is working as expected and it is helping buildthe necessary bridge to the recovery. The shape and timing of that recovery depends not only onwhen restrictions are lifted, but also on the confidence that Australians have about their ownhealth and their finances. With the national health outcomes better than earlier feared, it ispossible that the economic downturn will not be severe as earlier thought. Much depends on howquickly confidence can be restored.But even as the recovery gets under way, there will still be a shadow cast by the pandemic. As acountry, we will need to turn our minds as to how to move out of this shadow. A reform agendathat makes Australia a great place for businesses to expand, invest, innovate and hire peoplewould certainly help. For its part, the RBA will maintain its expansionary settings until progress isbeing made towards full employment and we are confident that inflation will be sustainably withinthe 2–3 per cent target band.I look forward to answering your questions.The Governor was invited to make a brief opening statement to the Committee of no more thantwo minutes. 1 / 1BIS central bankers' speeches
Yannis Stournaras: The recent decision of the GermanConstitutional Court regarding the Public Sector PurchaseProgramme of the European Central BankSpeech by Mr Yannis Stournaras, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the online discussion in thethink tank “Circle of Ideas”, 12 May 2020.*   *   *The decision of the German constitutional court questioning the legality of the ECB’sPublicSector Purchase Programme — or PSPP — has generated a great deal of confusion andconcern.The Court found that, in launching the PSPP in early 2015, the ECB exceeded its mandate; theCourt ordered the Deutsche Bundesbank to stop participating in the execution of the PSPP aftera transitional period of three months, “unless the ECB Governing Council adopts a new decisionthat demonstrates in a comprehensible and substantiated manner that the monetary policyobjectives pursued by the ECB are not disproportionate to the economic and fiscal effectsresulting from the programme.”Two essential principles, both of which underpin European cohesiveness and unity, are at stakehere.The first principle is a legal one. The German Court’s ruling effectively challenges a 2018 rulingby the European Court of Justice that the PSPP was legal. Which court — the GermanConstitutional Court, a national tribunal, or the European Court of Justice — has primacy inmatters relating to European institutions?Because the ruling by the German court has created a great deal of uncertainty, the issue oflegal primacy needs to be reaffirmed.I will leave it to my very distinguished co-speakers to address this issue from a legal perspective.The second principle concerns the independence of the ECB. It is this principle that I wish toaddress.In this connection, I will discuss three issues: first, the rationale for central bank independence;second, the ECB’s mandate; and third, the context of the decision to undertake the PSPP.On independence, there are important reasons why the ECB was made an independent centralbank on its inception in 1999.Numerous studies in the 1980s and the 1990s that compared central bank performance hadfound that independent central banks — and a prime example was the Deutsche Bundesbank —performed much better than other central banks. Independent central banks delivered lowerunemployment and lower inflation than others because they were free from political pressures.Independence, however, does not mean an absence of accountability. The ECB may beindependent, but it is also accountable. For example, the President of the ECB regularly appearsbefore the European Parliament to explain and justify the ECB’s policies. Like other nationalcentral bank Governors, I provide testimony on a regular basis before my national parliament.With regard to its mandate, the ECB can freely decide on the design and implementation of thesingle monetary policy for the euro area. Article 127 of the Maastricht Treaty assigns to the ECBthe primary objective of price stability.1 1 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
An important reason underlying the objective of price stability is the following. In the absence ofunforeseen events — the pandemic is an example of an unforeseen event — price stability helpsto deliver full employment to a society, that is, it helps ensure that people are working at fullcapacity without a build-up of inflationary pressures.In other words, although price stability is the ECB’s primary objective, that objective isunderpinned by the aim of providing the maximum number of job opportunities to the citizens ofthe euro area.In this context, monetary policy in the euro area is exercised in a uniform way. Given the singlecharacter of monetary policy, it might indeed be the case that monetary policy decisionsoccasionally are less “fitting / suitable” for some countries than for others.Does this then mean that any national central bank of the euro area can potentially be ordered byits highest national court to abstain from implementing monetary policy decisions? Under suchcircumstances is an efficient monetary policy implementation possible? What would be theconsequences if every high national court in the euro area challenged the decisions of aEuropean institution under the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice? And what would thatimply for the credibility of the monetary authority?I think that the implications to be drawn from my questions are self-evident.I now turn to the context of the 2015 decision to launch the PSPP.The economic backdrop was alarming. Inflation had been in negative territory and the threat ofprolonged low inflation — or deflation — was rising. Why was that a concern? For one thing,deflation reduces consumer and investment spending. It also means that individuals who have afixed amount of debt see their debt rise in real terms.History shows that countries that experienced deflation have undergone prolonged economichardship. The Great Depression that began in the United States in 1929 was marked by deflation;real output did not recover to its 1929 level until 1941, and only in light of the build-up of militaryspending for World War II.Not only was deflation in the euro area a threat, but the unemployment rate had increased to 11.5per cent.And let us not forget another ominous threat on the horizon — the reappearance of signs ofstrong fragmentation in financial markets across national borders. Monetary policy impulseswere not transmitted uniformly across the euro area. The euro area was in deep crisis.Against this background, what could be done at the euro-area level to respond to the crisis?A euro-area fiscal-policy response was hampered by the absence of a fiscal union. Bankingunion and the European Stability Mechanism were in their initial stages. Monetary policy was theonly game in town.Under these circumstances, and after taking into account not only the expected positive impactof the PSPP on inflation and real output, but also potential negative consequences, theprogramme was initiated.Crucially, after the decision was taken, the euro area unemployment rate steadily dropped, fallingto 7.3 per cent earlier this year.The negative consequences considered included, as mentioned in the account of the discussionof the Governing Council in January 2015, “moral hazard implications for euro area governments[which] could weaken their incentives for structural reforms and fiscal consolidation”, as well as 2 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
possible “financial stability ramifications” and “spillovers from sovereign bond purchases, not onlyto corporate bond prices, but also into equity prices [which] could trigger the mispricing ofrisks…”Furthermore, throughout the life of the PSPP, there has been an extensive discussion on everyaspect of the programme, in the central bank, in the academia and in the public arena. It is widelyacknowledged that unconventional monetary policy measures, including the PSPP, haveunintended consequences. In this regard, members of the Executive Board of the ECB havediscussed potential negative spillovers.Indicatively, after the start of the programme, Benoît Coeuré highlighted potential side effects toequity and real estate markets, as well as risks of emergence of asset price bubbles.In a similar vein, former vice-president Vítor Constâncio mentioned financial stability risks,stemming from a search for yield and higher leverage associated with non-standard measures,as well as wealth effects and increased inequality. Against these drawbacks, however, he foundthat macro-prudential tools are better suited than monetary policy to safeguard financial stability.Moreover, there had been no signs of asset overvaluation in the euro area.Finally, I would like to mention that all major central banks around the globe, including the FederalReserve Bank and the Bank of England, reacted in a similar way to the economic circumstancesprevailing in recent years, although the extent and the timing of their monetary policy interventionsdiffered.Therefore, I believe that the criticism of the German Constitutional Court regarding an unjustifieddecision on the PSPP does not hold. On the contrary, given the plethora of material available inthis regard, I must confess that this criticism was rather unexpected.In light of my foregoing remarks, what conclusions emerge?In the two decades since the inception of the euro area, we have witnessed the exceptionaldynamism and strength conveyed by the European unification process, the significant benefitsand the considerable successes associated with it.We have also witnessed the dysfunctionalities and imperfections imminent in the institutionalarchitecture of the euro area, which were amplified by the Great Financial crisis, and by theoutbreak of the current pandemic-related crisis.The answer to these –existing— problems is in my view the quest for the deepening of Europeanintegration – not a flight into nationalism.While criticism in good faith of decisions of European institutions, including the ECB, is indeedvalid and useful, decisions which provide fertile grounds for backtracking on European integrationare rather harmful.The ECB needs to be able to continue designing and implementing monetary policy for the entireeuro area, taking care for the smooth functioning of the transmission mechanism and tacklingfragmentation in financial markets.Allow me to conclude by quoting Aristotle, who said «τοὔνομα ἔχει νόμισμα, ὅτι οὐ φύσει ἀλλὰνόμῳ ἐστί». The currency is based on the Law. The Law needs to be upheld, in order to lendcredibility and stability to the currency.And this is exactly what the ECB has been doing – in tryingto fulfill its mandate according to the Treaty for the European Union. Bundesverfassungsgericht, Decisions, para.235.23412 3 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
 Account of the monetary policy meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB, held on21–22 January 2020. Remarks by Benoît Coeuré, at the SNB-IMF Conference “Monetary Policy Challenges in a Changing World,”Zurich, 12 May 2015. Panel remarks by Vítor Constâncio at the Annual Congress of the European Economic Association, Universityof Mannheim, 25 August 2015.234 4 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
Benjamin E Diokno: Transitioning towards the new economy post-CovidRemarks by Mr Benjamin E Diokno, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the centralbank of the Philippines), at the Wednesday Roundtabe @ Lido, 27 May 2020.*   *   *Good morning Melo and to everyone joining us in today’s virtual Wednesday Roundtable @ Lido.While nothing beats face-to-face interactions, I think we all are gradually getting used to the factthat virtual meetings are now becoming the norm.The COVID-19 pandemic has significantly changed our lives. Not only in the way we do things atpresent, but also in the way we view the future.Indeed, this crisis is not like anything we have seen in the past. As such, individual economiesand business entities respond in ways that reflect how they perceive the continued uncertaintyover the path, magnitude, and duration of the impact of the global health crisis.I take this opportunity to briefly share the BSP’s views on latest developments and prospects onthe Philippine economy as we face today’s circumstances.I will also discuss policy actions pursued by the BSP, in support of the government’s overallstrategy, to mitigate the impact of COVID-19 pandemic and help stabilize market conditions andrestore confidence.Let me first highlight that when this global health crisis broke out the Philippine economy hadbeen in a position of strength, with GDP growth averaging at above 6 percent over the past eightyears. The robust growth of the domestic economy in recent years has been achieved in anenvironment of generally stable inflation and has been anchored on purposeful structuralreforms.The country’s strong track record of prudent policymaking has likewise led to robust externalpayments position, record-high international reserves, improved external debt metrics, healthypublic finances, and positive macroeconomic performance.At the same time, Philippine banks continue to be sound, stable, and well-functioning across allmetrics.Just as the country’s strong macroeconomic fundamentals have provided a degree of cushionduring past crises, we remain cautiously optimistic that the same factors will serve as thecountry’s first line of defense and continue to keep the economy afloat amid the current crisis.Nevertheless, we are also equally mindful that the outlook for both global and domestic economicgrowth in 2020–2021 remains bleak and clouded with uncertainty. The International MonetaryFund (IMF), in its April 2020 World Economic Outlook (WEO) report, expects global economicactivity to shrink radically in 2020 given widespread disruptions caused by COVID-19.While a partial recovery is anticipated in 2021, global GDP level is expected to remain below thepre-COVID trend. The IMF projects global economic growth to contract sharply by 3.0 percent in2020 before inching up to 5.8 percent in 2021. Nine out of ten countries in the IMF’s 189-countrymembership are expected to see their economies contract in 2020, including the Philippines.The Development Budget Coordination Committee (DBCC) has recently announced the nationalgovernment’s revised Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth forecast range of –2.0 percent to –3.4 percent for 2020, a sharp departure from the 6.5 percent to 7.5 percent growth target range 1 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
before the pandemicFor 2021, the DBCC expects the domestic economy to recover strongly with a GDP growthforecast range of 7.1 percent to 8.1 percent, This strong rebound is based on the assumptionthat there is no serious second wave of the disease and that the government would be able tocraft and implement a robust economic recovery program.In this slide we show that OF remittances have been on a steady growth path in recent years andhave contributed as well to domestic economic expansion. For the first two months of 2020,cash remittances still grew by 4.6 percent to reach US$5 billion. With its strong contribution toconsumption expenditure, we understand the growing concern on how the COVID-19 pandemicwill impact on future remittances flows into the country.In this regard, the BSP closely monitors the latest reports from the Philippine OverseasEmployment Administration (POEA), Department of Labor and Employment (DOLE), and theDepartment of Foreign Affairs (DFA) on OF workers’ deployment, displacement, and repatriationstatus.OF remittances could contract in 2020 due mainly to the large repatriation of workers andeconomic disruptions in host countries. The World Bank projects a decline in global remittancesby about 20 percent in 2020, with remittance inflows to East Asia and the Pacific expected todecline by 13 percent, driven mainly by declining inflows from the US, the largest source ofremittances to the region.However, it is important to point out that crisis or no crises, Filipinos abroad continue to sendremittances to their families at home. It would appear that OFW remittances have an altruisticcharacter. Furthermore, the adverse impact of COVID-19 on remittances may be temporary.To mitigate the impact of the pandemic and ensure economic recovery post-COVID-19, the NGlaid out a 4-pillar socioeconomic strategy.The BSP’s contributions to the overall stabilization efforts fall under the third pillar.We expect that the economy will recover more strongly once fiscal and monetary stimulus gaintraction and workers and firms resume operations.We expect a U-shaped recovery for the Philippine economy once the fiscal and monetarystimulus measures gain traction over the next few months.In support of the government’s efforts toward a rapid economic recovery, the BSP implementeda package of extraordinary measures to ensure sufficient liquidity in the system as well asprovide regulatory relief to financial institutions.These measures include:1) reduction in the monetary policy rate by 125- basis points since the start of the year;2) reduction in the reserve requirement ratio by 200 basis points;3) purchases of Government Securities (GS) in the secondary market;4) reduction in the overnight reserve repurchase (RRP) volume offering;5) engaging in repurchase agreement with the National Government amounting to P300 billion;and6) approval of a package of measures to further reduce the financial burden on loans to micro, 2 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
small and medium enterprises (MSME), which would help hasten the sector’s recovery.The assistance directed to MSMEs could also enable these entities to extend support todisplaced OFWs who are planning to shift and engage in business operations.In addition, the BSP has remitted P20 billion as advanced dividends to the National Government(NG). Under our newly-amended charter, the BSP is no longer required to remit at least 50% ofits net income as dividends to the National Government, But we decided to do so in the spirit ofbeing part of the Government.The Monetary Board has also approved the granting of temporary regulatory and rediscountingrelief measures to BSP Supervised Financial Institutions (BSFIs).Some of these measures include relaxation of BSP regulations such as the single borrower’slimit (from 25% to 30%) to allow BSFIs to lend more; penalty for reserve deficiencies andcompliance period with BSP supervisory and reportorial requirements to allow banks to focus ondelivery of financial services; and know your customer (KYC) requirements to facilitate accessby the public to financial services.Meanwhile, prudential accounting relief measures were also implemented to reduce the impactof Mark-to- Market (MTM) losses on the financial condition of supervised financial institutions.Moreover, the BSP has implemented extraordinary liquidity measures to complement theNational Government’s programs in mitigating the impact of COVID-19. These measures includea ₱300 billion repurchase agreement with the Bureau of the Treasury as well as the launching ofa package of measures to support lending to micro-, small-, and medium-sized enterprises(MSMEs).Recognizing the importance of MSMEs in the economy, the BSP allowed banks to include newMSME loans as part of their compliance with the required reserve ratio. BSP temporarily reducedthe credit risk weight of MSME loans that are current in status from 75% to 50% and zero weightfor loans with government guarantee.These policy measures are aimed at encouraging more bank lending to MSMEs.In closing, let me emphasize that the BSP has responded swiftly and decisively to mitigateeconomic and financial fall-out from the COVID-19 pandemic through its monetary instrumentsand regulatory relief measures.But there remains risks to our growth outlook even as a strong recovery is expected in 2021. Thechallenge for policymakers, therefore, is how to boost the economy through the appropriate mixof fiscal and monetary measures. And even as we enable the economy to gradually regain itsfooting, we should continue with our efforts to make the economy nimbler to adapt to the neweconomy.In particular, the BSP is committed to pursuing a 3-year digital payments transformationroadmap that includes priority initiatives such as open banking. I believe the ongoing changes tothe domestic economy are a good opportunity to accelerate the BSP’s call towards greaterdigitalization to promote a more efficient and inclusive financial systemThe BSP will continue to work with market participants and relevant government authorities toensure that its policy responses and reform initiatives remain timely and appropriate for thesechallenging times.Thank you. 3 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
30/09/2020The LIBOR Countdown Has Not Stopped - FEDERAL RESERVE BANK of NEW YORKhttps://www.newyorkfed.org/newsevents/speeches/2020/hel2009291/6SPEECHThe LIBOR Countdown Has Not StoppedSeptember 29, 2020Michael Held, Executive Vice President and General CounselRemarks at the IMN Virtual Investors' Conference on LIBORThank you for that kind introduction, and for the opportunity to speak to you all today. As always,my remarks reflect my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of NewYork or the Federal Reserve System.The last time I spoke publicly about LIBOR transition was almost 18 months ago, when the end ofLIBOR still seemed reasonably far away and the world in general seemed much more predictable. Isaid then that what kept me up most at night was whether my daughter would get into a goodkindergarten in Brooklyn, but that reference rate reform was only a little further down the list.You’ll be relieved to know that my daughter is now in a great school, and it’s very close to home. Infact, it’s in our living room. A year and a half ago, I never could have anticipated how different anduncertain every single part of our lives would become. Now, there’s a whole host of new worriesatop the list of things that keep me up at night. I’m sure that’s true for all of you as well, asindividuals and families but also as leaders of institutions dealing with the bizarre and uncertaintimes we find ourselves in. Those new concerns and risks have understandably pushed many well-laid plans into the background, and the pandemic has had such far-reaching effects that all sorts ofthings we thought we knew would happen have become uncertain. What I want to do today isremind you all that despite everything else that’s happening, the end of LIBOR is still coming.Exactly how that happens is still uncertain, but the best response to uncertainty about tomorrow isto take decisive action today.Since my speech last year, there has been substantial progress in addressing some of theuncertainties that surrounded LIBOR transition, even as new uncertainties have arisen. Now, manylawyers love uncertainty. If everything were crystal clear, what would we spend our time arguingabout?I have said before that the end of LIBOR presents a rather frightening—or awe inspiring, dependingon your perspective—litigation risk. But it’s not just litigation risk. The LIBOR transitionencompasses a whole panoply of risks. Yes, legal risk, but also operational risk, credit risk,regulatory risk, reputational risk, you name it—LIBOR has it all. So the possibility of a failed LIBORtransition is something that should keep all of us up at night.But let’s try and stay positive in these rather dark times—let’s talk about what progress has beenmade, and what you can do now to minimize the uncertainties that remain. My remarks will focuson the transition in the United States for U.S. dollar LIBOR, but I will touch on some internationaldevelopments that are relevant to that transition.LIBOR: The End of an ErrorSome people have asked whether the end of LIBOR will be pushed out somehow to allow more timefor transition. Some people, I suspect, may even hope that this ends up being the case. After all, thetask is daunting. But I would remind folks that the adage is not “why do today what can be put off12
30/09/2020The LIBOR Countdown Has Not Stopped - FEDERAL RESERVE BANK of NEW YORKhttps://www.newyorkfed.org/newsevents/speeches/2020/hel2009292/6until tomorrow?” Quite the opposite. Indeed, the UK’s Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) hasreiterated that the pandemic has not altered the central assumption that firms cannot rely onLIBOR being published after the end of 2021. In fact, the FCA has said that even though LIBORwill continue until then, announcements about its end could come as early as this November orDecember. The Financial Stability Board (FSB)—which is chaired by Randy Quarles, the FederalReserve Board’s Vice Chair for Supervision—has also emphasized that the pandemic should notprevent firms from removing any remaining dependencies on LIBOR by the end of 2021.The Alternative Reference Rates Committee (ARRC), which is the private-sector committeeconvened by the Federal Reserve to facilitate the transition away from U.S. dollar LIBOR, hasrecommended that floating-rate notes, syndicated loans, consumer loans, and securitizationsshould already include definitive fallbacks to cope with the end of LIBOR, and has set target datesby which no new LIBOR-based products should be issued. The ARRC also has provided a timelineand resources to ensure that vendors and operational systems are ready for the switch toalternative rates. Why? Because having a LIBOR transition office and a high-level plan is notenough. Do not underestimate the operational, technical, legal, communications, and riskmanagement work that will be required to move existing transactions off of LIBOR and prepare touse an alternative rate. It will take time and resources, and the price of failure or delay in any ofthose areas could be high.There Ought to Be a LawAnother uncertainty is the possibility of legislation in United States, the United Kingdom, or theEuropean Union to ease the transition. In the U.S., the ARRC has proposed that New York Stateshould, by the force of law, substitute a rate based on the Secured Overnight Financing Rate forLIBOR in contracts that would otherwise have no workable fallback when LIBOR ceases.Butagain, this solution is aimed at contracts that don’t specify another fallback and can’t be amendedto do so—primarily floating-rate bonds. We can hope that the New York legislature will take up thisproposal in its next session, but obviously it has a lot of other pressing business these days, and noone can guarantee that there will be a legislative Hail Mary. And even if there is, it would notdisplace non-LIBOR fallbacks that are written into existing contracts, which may not be thealternative you’d prefer. The lesson here is that for every exposure you have to LIBOR, doeverything you can right now to make sure it provides for the end of LIBOR in clear terms. Do notwait for the state cavalry to ride to your rescue.In the UK, the government has said it will give the FCA new powers to smooth the transition, andthere has been speculation about what the FCA will do with those powers. The UK legislation takesa very different approach from the proposed New York law. It raises the prospect of LIBORcontinuing under a new methodology as “synthetic LIBOR,” at least in some currencies. But theFCA itself has warned that whatever it does will not be an alternative to firms’ transition efforts,and that any synthetic continuation of LIBOR will still not be deemed to be a representativerate. The FCA has said that any action it takes will be focused on contracts that cannot feasibly beamended by the parties to mitigate the effects of LIBOR cessation. It will not provide a solution fornew contracts. And even at that, it will not necessarily address every LIBOR setting or currency.For those it does reach, users will be giving up control of the economics of their contracts towhatever the new methodology may be. In short, if you rely on these new powers to take care ofyour LIBOR contracts, you may not get what you want, and you may not like what you get. Themessage is clear: you must still do everything you can, right now, to anticipate the end of LIBORand take control of your own risks.345678910
30/09/2020The LIBOR Countdown Has Not Stopped - FEDERAL RESERVE BANK of NEW YORKhttps://www.newyorkfed.org/newsevents/speeches/2020/hel2009293/6In the European Union, there is draft legislation that is similar in approach to the ARRC’s proposedNew York law.  For contracts that are in scope for the EU’s existing Benchmarks Regulation, itwould replace a benchmark that had ceased publication or become non-representative with onedesignated by the European Commission. But it would apply only to contracts with an EU-supervised entity and where there is no “suitable” fallback. Like the New York proposal and the UKlaw, the EU legislation is intended only to provide a fail-safe for contracts that cannot beproactively managed, and the fail-safe rate the European Commission decides on may not be theone that best suits your needs.As a last note on the legislative front, the European Commission has also said it will recommendthat the various EU member states adopt national-level legislation to address contracts that theEU-level action doesn’t reach. To state what is perhaps obvious, it’s unclear at this point—and willlikely remain unclear for some time—how the various legislative efforts in the UK, the EU, the EUmembers states, and the U.S. will play out, and how they will interact with one another. Everyglobal firm that uses LIBOR anywhere in its operations will need to follow those developments andevaluate carefully what effect this legislation would have on each contract of each of its legalentities. To me, the clearest takeaway from all of that is that you should not wait for these proposalsto become law and then decide how they affect you and whether you like the result. There isn’t timefor that. Do everything you can now to proactively manage your LIBOR risk across everyjurisdiction where you have exposure.Let’s Stand on ProtocolFor derivatives, which represent by far the largest U.S. dollar LIBOR exposures in the market, thereis some good news. Standard derivatives documentation does not have workable fallbacks toaccommodate the end of LIBOR, and there is enormous uncertainty about what will happen in thismarket when LIBOR ceases. That’s not the good news. The good news is that there is a simpleaction every market participant can take to end that uncertainty right now. The InternationalSwaps and Derivatives Association (ISDA) will be opening a protocol soon that resolves thisuncertainty for firms that sign up to it. The ARRC has recommended that all firms adhere to theprotocol as a best practice. This is an area where the exposures and the risks to firms and thesystem as a whole are very large, but there will soon be a clear option for managing those risks. Andbecause ISDA has contracted with Bloomberg to calculate and publish the protocol’s fallback ratesbeginning now, if you adhere to the protocol you can have a good understanding of the effect ofLIBOR’s end on your derivatives well before it actually goes away. Even better, the ARRC hasannounced that its recommended rate for LIBOR products that transition to SOFR will be the sameas the ISDA protocol’s fallback rate. So you can have that same certainty for cash products as well.Also on the derivatives front, clearinghouses LCH and CME will change over discounting and pricealignment interest on listed derivatives to SOFR in two weeks’ time, and will incorporate the ISDAtransition terms into their standard contracts. That should help increase activity in SOFRderivatives, which, as we’ll see next, should help lay further groundwork for new SOFR-basedalternatives.Coming to Terms with SOFRApart from the overnight and average SOFR rates that are being used right now, there are twoother types of rates that some market participants seem to be awaiting. One is the forward-lookingterm SOFR rate that the ARRC is working on. Earlier this month the ARRC released a request for111213
30/09/2020The LIBOR Countdown Has Not Stopped - FEDERAL RESERVE BANK of NEW YORKhttps://www.newyorkfed.org/newsevents/speeches/2020/hel2009294/6proposals for the design and production of term SOFR. But that doesn’t mean you should wait forit. No one can guarantee that the ARRC will end up recommending a term rate, or when that willhappen if it does. Designing a robust new rate is not a quick process, and the ARRC’s first prioritywill be ensuring that whatever term rate it recommends is robust and durable. The likeliest basisfor such a rate is forward derivative contracts on SOFR, which have not yet reached the volume andliquidity that are sufficient to support a widely used term rate. So even once a design is set and anadministrator is lined up, it may well be some time before the term rate is ready for prime time.The important point here is that you shouldn’t delay your move off of LIBOR in the hope that aforward-looking term version of SOFR will come along. SOFR is available right now, including 30-,90- and 180-day compound averages published daily by the New York Fed that are less variablethan overnight rates and can be used in all types of cash products. And to make it easier andpromote consistency, the ARRC has prepared an extensive set of detailed, product-specificrecommendations and conventions for how to do exactly that.Spread the Credit AroundThe second type of potential rate that has gotten a lot of attention lately is one that incorporates ameasure of credit risk, since SOFR is a secured rate. Some banks have expressed concerns aboutusing SOFR in commercial loans without an additional credit component. As part of its work tounderstand and address any obstacles to the transition away from LIBOR, the New York Fed hashosted a series of four workshops to explore and understand these concerns from both banks’ andborrowers’ points of view. The aim of these discussions has been to understand the issues at play.We do not yet know the end result of these workshops, and it would be premature for me tocomment on any next steps at this point. But I will say that no one involved in those workshops hassuggested that they provide a reason to delay moving away from LIBOR on the timetable that we’renow all too familiar with.I want to be clear—as the ARRC and the Fed have been from the beginning—that no one isrequiring that everyone use SOFR for all purposes or for any specific purpose. There are otheralternatives out there, and nothing prevents you from using any rate that’s robust, appropriate foryour institution, and fit for the use you’re putting it to. What is most important is that you move offof LIBOR and do it now. But in deciding what to move to, remember that SOFR is the foundationfor the transition from U.S. dollar LIBOR because it meets very high standards. The ARRC wentthrough an extensive review and consultation process and got input from a wide range of marketparticipants. It evaluated a number of alternative rates for benchmark quality, methodologicalquality, accountability, governance, and ease of implementation. SOFR was the clear first choice.It’s produced by the New York Fed and is based on about a trillion dollars’ worth of dailytransactions in a broad and liquid market that a wide array of firms of all types have access to. TheNew York Fed has provided detailed public information about every aspect of SOFR, includinghistorical data and a point-by-point description of how it complies with the benchmark principlesset out by the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO). You should makesure that any other reference rate you use meets similarly high standards, and is fully transparentabout how it’s calculated, what it’s based on, and exactly how it complies with the IOSCOprinciples.The ARRC and ISDA also went through an extensive public consultation process in constructingtheir recommended fallbacks that will kick in when LIBOR becomes unusable. The overriding goalof that process was to minimize value transfer and ensure as much as possible that the transitiondid not disadvantage borrowers or lenders, or one side of a LIBOR swap. And those are the same1415
30/09/2020The LIBOR Countdown Has Not Stopped - FEDERAL RESERVE BANK of NEW YORKhttps://www.newyorkfed.org/newsevents/speeches/2020/hel2009295/6fallbacks that will apply under the ARRC’s proposed New York legislation. Anyone consideringusing different fallbacks should likewise keep those concerns top of mind.Making it OfficialBefore I wrap up, I’d like to talk about the role of the official sector in the transition. It might seemat times that our role has consisted mostly of forming working groups and giving speeches wherewe harangue market participants to just get on with it already—kind of like this one. Of course, as Imentioned, the New York Fed has stepped up by producing SOFR, which is key to the transition.But it’s also clear that a significant speed bump in transition is uncertainty about how the switch tonew rates will be treated under the huge range of existing regulations that weren’t written with thiskind of event in mind. The official sector must pave the way for transition by eliminating thatuncertainty. Paving over the speed bumps, if you will. Since my last speech about LIBOR, theofficial sector has worked closely with the ARRC and others to provide clear guidance and offer theprospect of relief from existing rules. There is a final rule on swap margins for legacy swaps thattransition away from LIBOR, a proposed CFPB rule on transitioning consumercredit, accounting guidance from the FASB and the SEC, tax guidance from the IRS, and relieffrom the CFTC. The Federal Housing Finance Administration has taken a number of actions,including prohibiting the Federal Home Loan Banks from entering into LIBOR transactions orinvestments. Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac will stop accepting LIBOR-based ARMs by the end ofthis year and have created new ARM products indexed to the 30-day SOFR average.The supervisory agencies have also eliminated uncertainty about what stance they will be taking onLIBOR transition in their supervisory and examination work—they’ve said very clearly they’ll befocusing on it, and every supervised firm needs to focus on it too. On the international level, theFSB and the Basel Committee have urged the authorities in each jurisdiction to identify theremaining transition issues and increase the intensity of their supervisory actions when thepreparations of individual banks are unsatisfactory. The Basel Committee has also put out FAQson benchmark reform under the Basel Framework. In the United States, the Federal FinancialInstitutions Examination Council (FFIEC) has emphasized the financial, legal, operational, andconsumer protection risks of the upcoming transition and announced that the supervisory focus onevaluating institutions’ preparedness will increase in the rest of 2020 and 2021. And the SEC hasidentified registrant preparedness for the transition away from LIBOR as an examination programpriority for the coming fiscal year. So be prepared to answer questions about how you’re planningfor the end of LIBOR across your business.ConclusionGiven how deeply embedded LIBOR is in products and systems across the commercial landscape,the transition away from LIBOR is a huge undertaking that presents a whole array of risks. Thereremain a host of uncertainties about the end of LIBOR, but very little uncertainty about what firmsshould do to prepare for it. A year and a half ago, I talked about ongoing consultations and said thatthe way forward for the vast majority of LIBOR-based instruments was rapidly becoming clear.Well, those consultations have concluded, and the way forward, for all types of LIBOR instruments,is now clear indeed. Raymond Check assisted in preparing these remarks. Mr. Held would like to thank his other colleagues at the Federal Reserve whoprovided comments and corrections. Michael Held, SOFR and the Transition from LIBOR, February 26, 2019.16171819202122232425262712
30/09/2020The LIBOR Countdown Has Not Stopped - FEDERAL RESERVE BANK of NEW YORKhttps://www.newyorkfed.org/newsevents/speeches/2020/hel2009296/6 FCA, Impact of the coronavirus on firms' LIBOR transition plans, March 3, 2020; see also Letter from Randal Quarles to G20Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors Libor death notice could be served this year--FCA, Risk.net, June 22, 2020. FSB Statement on the Impact of Covid-19 on Global Benchmark Reform, July 1, 2020. ARRC Recommended Best Practices for Completing the Transition from LIBOR. For example, see Internal Systems & Processes: Transition Aid for SOFR Adoption and the Practical Implementation Checklist forSOFR Adoption. Proposed Legislative Solution to Minimize Legal Uncertainty and Adverse Economic Impact Associated with LIBOR Transition. Statement by Rishi Sunak, Chancellor of the Exchequer, June 23, 2020. Edwin Schooling Latter, LIBOR transition-the critical tasks ahead of us in the second half of 2020, August 3, 2020. Commission's proposal to amend EU rules on financial benchmarks. Fact Sheet: IBOR Fallbacks. ARRC Announces Recommendation of a Spread Adjustment Methodology for Cash Products; ARRC Announces Further DetailsRegarding it Recommendation of Spread Adjustments for Cash Products. ARRC Releases Request for Proposals for the Publication of Forward-Looking Term Rates. Transition from LIBOR: Credit Sensitivity Group Workshops; see also Nathaniel Wuerffel, Transitioning Away from LIBOR:Understanding SOFR's Strengths and Considering the Path Forward. Final Rule on Margin and Capital Requirements for Covered Swap Entities. Facilitating the LIBOR Transition (Regulation Z); see also the CFPB’s updated Consumer Handbook on Adjustable RateMortgages and LIBOR Transition FAQs. FASB Issues Guidance to Assist in Transition Away from Interbank Offered Rates to New Reference Rates; Letter to SECconfirming treatment of interest rate reset features as embedded derivatives. See also Government Accounting Standards BoardStatement No. 93, Replacement of Interbank Offered Rates and International Accounting Standards Board Staff Paper on IssuesLeading up to IBOR Reform. Guidance on the Transition From Interbank Offered Rates to Other Reference Rates; see also Letter from the ARRC to U.S.Treasury Department and Internal Revenue Service regarding proposed regulations and Letter from the ARRC to U.S. TreasuryDepartment and Internal Revenue Service requesting guidance regarding financial contract discount rate transition. CFTC Provides Relief to Market Participants Transitioning Away from LIBOR; CFTC Provides Additional Relief to MarketParticipants Transitioning from LIBOR; see also Letter from the ARRC to the CFTC regarding treatment of discount rate changes byderivatives clearing organizations. FHFA, Libor Transition. FHFA Announces Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac Update on LIBOR Transition, February 5, 2020. Fannie Mae to Accept Single-Family SOFR ARM Products Beginning August 3, 2020; SOFR-Indexed ARMS. See also their LIBORTransition Playbook. Supervisory issues associated with benchmark transition: Report to the G20, July 9, 2020. BCBS, Basel Framework frequently asked questions, June 2020. Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council Joint Statement on Managing the LIBOR Transition. OCIE, Risk Alert: Examination Initiative: LIBOR Transition Preparedness, June 18, 2020.3456789101112131415161718192021222324252627
30/09/2020The monetary policy strategy review: some preliminary considerationshttps://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2020/html/ecb.sp200930~169abb1202.en.html1/7SPEECHThe monetary policy strategy review: somepreliminary considerationsSpeech by Christine Lagarde, President of the ECB, at the “ECB and Its Watchers XXI” conferenceFrankfurt am Main, 30 September 2020Thank you for inviting me to address this conference. This morning, I would like to speak to you about theECB’s strategy review, the reasons we are conducting it, and our expectations as a result of it.Since 2003, when we last conducted a strategy review, the euro area and the world economy haveundergone profound changes. The consensus that has governed monetary policy worldwide has beenchallenged on a number of fronts.Most importantly, the last decade has been defined by a persistent decline in inflation among advancedeconomies. In the euro area, annual inflation averaged 2.3% from 1999 to the eve of the great financialcrisis in August 2008, but only 1.2% from then until the end of 2019.This environment poses fundamental questions for central banks. We need to thoroughly analyse theforces that are driving inflation dynamics today, and consider whether and how we should adjust ourpolicy strategy in response. To inform this analysis, we also want to hear from a wide variety ofstakeholders – including citizens, academics, parliamentarians and civil society organisations – abouthow they perceive our goals and actions. This is why we have launched the “ECB Listens” programme, inwhich we will aim to listen to as many voices as possible.As we have just restarted our strategy review – we put it on hold when the coronavirus (COVID-19)pandemic struck – I will not be presenting any conclusions today. Now is the time for listening andreflecting. But I will discuss the main issues we are looking at and some of the key questions we will beasking.In my remarks today I will cover three topics: first, the definition of our inflation objective; second, therelationship between inflation and the real economy; and third, the transmission and effectiveness ofmonetary policy. None of these issues can be considered in isolation and we need a well-rounded view ofall elements in order to draw conclusions for the strategy review.The inflation objectiveI start with the inflation objective because it anchors the inflation process for the whole economy. Threeissues will feature particularly prominently in our review.The first is how to formulate the inflation aim.The arguments in favour of central banks aiming for positive inflation rates with a sufficient buffer awayfrom zero were articulated during our strategy review in 2003. It compensates for possible measurementbias, helps countries rebalance their economies within a monetary union and creates a buffer againstdeflation, as well as leading to higher nominal interest rates over the medium term. That helps ensure thatmonetary policy is not forced too often towards the effective lower bound – the level of interest rates atwhich further cuts do not have the desired positive impact – when faced with shocks that push inflationtoo low.Since 2003, the ECB has used a double-key formulation to set our objective, defining price stability as ayear-on-year increase in inflation of “below 2%”, while aiming for inflation of “below, but close to, 2%”.   
30/09/2020The monetary policy strategy review: some preliminary considerationshttps://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2020/html/ecb.sp200930~169abb1202.en.html2/7This formulation was appropriate at a time when the ECB was seeking to establish credibility and too-highinflation was its main worry. As our research shows, it was a key factor in successfully capping inflationexpectations.[1]But in the current environment of lower inflation, the concerns we face are different and this needs to bereflected in our inflation aim. Ensuring that there is sufficient space above zero to re-empowerconventional monetary policy becomes more important. And, to underpin inflation expectations, we needto ensure that our aim is perceived to be symmetric by the public. So we should have an inflation aim thatthe public can easily understand.The second issue is the horizon over which price stability should be achieved, which is captured bythe ECB’s “medium term” orientation. This forward-looking orientation reflects traditional and well-established principles of prudent monetary policy, which is consistent with the notion that monetary policyworks with a lag and can influence inflation over the medium term rather than the near term.But within the ECB’s framework, the medium-term orientation has also been a way for the GoverningCouncil to take into account what is happening in the real economy, including employment. We have ahierarchical mandate with price stability at the top. But the medium term, which is a flexible concept,allows us to avoid unnecessarily constricting jobs and growth in the event of a supply shock whichtemporarily pushes up inflation and generates an economic slump.The low inflation environment creates some new questions about how to operationalise the medium term.For instance, the existence of large and persistent disinflationary shocks related to, say, the ability tocompare prices more actively via the internet and diversify suppliers is likely to call for more flexibility. Buta persistent failure to meet the inflation aim can feed into inflation expectations and would call for ashorter policy horizon.We also need to reflect on our two pillar approach for assessing developments in the economy, whichuses both economic and monetary analysis. Cross-checking between the two helps determine the risks toprice stability. The monetary pillar could in principle be enhanced to provide information on financialstability which – over longer time horizons – could be relevant for the inflation outlook.Central banks have also considered adding a backward-looking element to the policy horizon in responseto the low inflation environment. In the ECB’s case, the reference to underlying inflation dynamics in ourforward guidance means that we already look at the past when deciding whether to change policy. Thewider discussion today, however, is whether central banks should commit to explicitly make up forinflation misses when they have spent quite some time below their inflation goals.If credible, such a strategy can strengthen the capacity of monetary policy to stabilise the economy whenfaced with the lower bound. This is because the promise of inflation overshooting raises inflationexpectations and therefore lowers real interest rates.[2] While make-up strategies may be less successfulwhen people are not perfectly rational in their decisions[3] – which is probably a good approximation of thereality we face – the usefulness of such an approach could be examined.The third issue is the measure of inflation that lies behind our inflation aim.The Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) has served us well so far and is continuously beingimproved. Examples of these improvements include how it accounts for quality change, annual changesin consumption weights, more granular categories of expenditure and more timely data.At the same time, our economies are changing increasingly quickly. We need to keep track of broadconcepts of inflation that capture the costs people face in their everyday lives and reflect theirperceptions, including measures of owner-occupied housing. This is not about moving the goalposts formonetary policy. It is about future-proofing how we measure inflation. But we also need to recognise thatadjustments will present issues in terms of reliability and frequency of the data.Likewise, to get a better sense of the evolution of the HICP over the medium term, we need tocomplement our analysis also by looking at more cyclical and less volatile measures of inflation, such asunderlying inflation. The public rightly expects us to defend the purchasing power of money and that is
30/09/2020The monetary policy strategy review: some preliminary considerationshttps://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2020/html/ecb.sp200930~169abb1202.en.html3/7why we target the overall HICP. But underlying inflation measures are more responsive to economic slackand tend to better predict inflation over the medium term.The relationship between inflation and the real economyIf the anchor for inflation is the inflation aim, the Phillips curve – the link between the real economy andinflation – plays a central role in allowing central banks to steer inflation towards that aim. But in the lowinflation environment, prices appear to have become less responsive to the real economy. ECB researchsuggests that the empirical Phillips curve remains intact, but it may be rather flat.[4]Broadly speaking, three factors might explain why inflation responded so weakly to improvements in theeconomy in the run-up to the pandemic.The first possibility is that economic slack – the amount of underused resources in the economy – waslarger than we thought. The second possibility is that the relationship between slack and inflation wasobscured by persistent structural forces. And the third is that the anchoring of inflation expectations mighthave loosened, affecting where inflation settles when both demand and supply shocks have passed andslack converges at zero.The intuition behind the first factor is that the Phillips curve is alive and well, but the euro area faced aseries of large shocks that made it harder to measure economic activity relative to potential. Since itis the distance from full employment that matters in terms of moving inflation in the Phillips curve, if thatdistance is underestimated inflation may remain subdued even as measured slack gets smaller.There are numerous potential causes of this mismeasurement, including: measures of unemploymentthat ignored the effects of part-time work and underemployment[5]; revisions to potential output whichmistook cyclical changes for structural trends[6]; or a failure to fully account for external factors that addedto euro area slack, such as relative demand imbalances linked to the trade surplus.[7] Research supportssuch a role for “hidden slack”. Since 2011, studies that assume that the output gap has been much largerhave, in general, outperformed those that use traditional estimates.[8]What is striking, though, is that in the run-up to the pandemic we saw labour market slack diminishing andwages finally rising, but without inflation picking up. In fact, ECB research finds that there was no missingwage inflation in recent years. What we saw instead was a slower pass-through from wages to prices,because companies preferred to compress margins rather than pass on cost rises.[9] For monetary policy,it matters whether firms did this because they expected slowing demand, or because they were affectedby persistent structural changes that distorted historical regularities.This brings me to the second factor: long-running structural forces. How could they have weakenedthe link between the real economy and inflation and thereby require a revised approach to monetarypolicy?It is clear that globalisation lifted the global labour supply, sharpened competition and caused firms to setprices more strategically. Globalisation also went hand in hand with digitalisation, which increased pricetransparency and enabled many industries to reduce costs. In theory, all these factors could havedepressed price inflation, even as wage growth was being supported through productivity gains fromtechnology. In parallel, adverse demographics in advanced economies may have led to higher savingrates and structurally weaker demand.[10]Research suggests that these forces have affected inflation in the euro area in recent decades. A recentstudy finds that global factors, such as global commodity prices, global slack and producer pricecompetition, can all significantly affect inflation.[11] ECB research also finds that digitalisation has beendisinflationary in the euro area: since 2006, e-commerce has led to an average yearly decrease in non-energy industrial goods inflation of 0.06 percentage points.[12] And empirical evidence suggests that ashrinking working-age population may depress inflation.[13]
30/09/2020The monetary policy strategy review: some preliminary considerationshttps://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2020/html/ecb.sp200930~169abb1202.en.html4/7At the same time, structural forces need not be net deflationary, particularly in the aftermath of theCOVID-19 pandemic. While globalisation and digitalisation have tended to pull in the same direction overthe past 20 years, it is conceivable that they might now pull in opposite directions. The pandemic mightboth trigger de-globalisation – as protectionism rises and firms shorten supply chains to increaseoperational resilience – and accelerate the expansion of the digital economy. Changing globaldemographics might also reduce the global labour supply.[14]In addition, a more active countercyclical role for fiscal policy after the pandemic may strengthen inflationdynamics. And we have to factor in a renewed focus on mitigating climate change, too, which could havean impact on inflation through progressive changes in the energy mix as we transition towards a carbon-neutral economy. Climate change affects all aspects of monetary policy: output and inflation, long-terminterest rates and policy transmission. That is why we are carefully studying the implications of climatechange for our primary objective as part of our strategy review.In any event, structural factors can only have a lasting negative impact on inflation if they seepinto inflation expectations. This leads me to the third factor that may explain the apparent disconnectbetween the real economy and inflation. Empirically, it is not straightforward to gauge the anchoring ofinflation expectations. There can be differing interpretations depending on the approach used to defineanchoring, as well as the measure and horizon of inflation expectations considered.That said, market-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations have fallen notably, even whenadjusted for various risk premia that can distort the picture. Those measures have also become moreresponsive to short-term news, which can be interpreted as a sign that their anchoring has softened.Survey-based measures remain more or less within a range consistent with the ECB’s aim (i.e. 1.7-1.9%),but they have also moved to the bottom of that range since 2019.For the actual process of setting wages and prices, it is the expectations of the public that matter most.Since our last strategy review there has been more research on how consumers and firms form theirinflation expectations. While data are still scarce and noisy, the general picture is that consumers holdvery diverse expectations about inflation that appear far less well anchored to our aim than othermeasures of inflation expectations. In 2015 average perceived inflation among euro area households wasjust under 5%, while actual inflation was 0.3%.The generally higher level of household expectations is not necessarily a cause for comfort, however.What emerges from the research in this area is that households take a long time to absorb newinformation on inflation, but when their expectations do adjust they can be hard to dislodge – and thedirection in which people perceive inflation to be heading can affect their economic decisions.[15]This process is of course not exogenous to monetary policy: it is greatly influenced by the central bank’sobjective and how policy is conducted and communicated in the pursuit of that objective. This is why thediscussion about the numerical definition of price stability and the instruments that can support it overtime is so important.Clearly, the three factors I have discussed are not mutually exclusive. So it is crucial that we gain a muchdeeper understanding of their relevance and interactions in order to draw appropriate conclusions for howwe conduct our monetary policy. As part of this, we need to understand how they might have interactedwith monetary policy approaching the lower bound. This brings me to the final area I would like to discusstoday: monetary policy transmission and effectiveness.Monetary policy transmission and effectivenessAs monetary policy everywhere has approached the lower bound, all major central banks have facedquestions about their policy space and the traction of their tools on the economy.A key challenge has been the long-term fall in estimates of the natural interest rate. The natural rate is theunobservable interest rate that brings desired saving and investment into balance, or to put it anotherway, that brings output close to its potential. Monetary policy is accommodative when the policy rate isbelow the natural rate, and restrictive when the policy rate is above it. Estimates for the natural rate in theeuro area have dropped from between 0.6% and 2.2% on average from 1999 to 2011, to between -1.3%
30/09/2020The monetary policy strategy review: some preliminary considerationshttps://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2020/html/ecb.sp200930~169abb1202.en.html5/7and 0.5% thereafter.[16] This has required progressively lower policy rates in order to ease monetarypolicy – or even to prevent an unchanged policy stance from becoming more restrictive.Central banks around the world have shown that this is not a barrier to stabilising the economy. Beforethe pandemic, the ECB was able to offset the effects of a declining natural rate by taking its depositfacility rate into negative territory and by deploying forward guidance and asset purchases to easefinancing conditions at longer maturities. Indeed, asset purchases – by compressing longer-term bondyields – can induce an easing of financial conditions that can partly compensate for the diminishing scopefor conventional rate cuts. We also launched a series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations(TLTROs) to strengthen the pass-through of these measures via banks to the real economy.The effect on both financial conditions and the real economy was significant. Considering all themeasures taken since mid-2014, the overall impact on euro area real GDP growth is estimated to havebeen between 2.5 and 3 percentage points cumulatively until 2019, and the impact on inflation isestimated to have been between 1.7 and 2 percentage points cumulatively over the same period.The response to the pandemic has provided further evidence of effectiveness. Our pandemic emergencypurchase programme (PEPP) and the new series of TLTROs have proven to be powerful tools forstabilising financing conditions and stimulating credit growth.[17] According to ECB staff estimates, themeasures we have taken since March this year will increase inflation by around 0.8 percentage pointscumulatively between 2020 and 2022, and GDP growth by around 1.3 percentage points.However, we have to reflect on what will happen if natural rates remain low and inflation stays subdued –meaning central banks have to continue to resort frequently to balance sheet policies to deliver on theirmandates. This scenario throws up two issues that we need to consider more deeply.The first is what should be the standardised toolkit for a world where unconventional policy is“normal”. The implicit assumption since 2008 has been that policy “normalisation” will mean returningmainly to interest rate policy and winding down unconventional policies. But if “normal” is closer to whatwe saw before the outbreak of the pandemic and, I am afraid, what we are seeing even more vividly now,we need to be prepared. We need to have a clear consensus – agreed within the Governing Council andunderstood by the public – on what tools are available to us when inflation is too low, and how theyshould be systematically deployed in response to different types of shock.So we need to further our understanding of the transmission channels of our different instruments, and toevaluate their relative side effects, both intended and unintended, as they work their way through theeconomy. A central question is the extent to which different tools are substitutes or complements andtheir potential non-linearities – that is, how their effectiveness might change over time or in differenteconomic conditions.We already have some evidence on substitutability. For example, ECB research finds that without the useof large-scale asset purchases since 2015, our deposit facility rate would have had to fall to around -2%to achieve the same path of inflation we observed. This is a level that would probably have triggered“reversal rate” dynamics, a situation where a rate cut would become contractionary because it harms thebusiness models of financial intermediaries and disrupts monetary policy transmission.[18]Conversely, other instruments have displayed complementarities. Think, for example, of our TLTROs andour negative rate policy. The former have been able to leverage the power of the latter by channelling thestimulative impulse associated with sub-zero rates directly to banks. Unlike in a “reversal rate” scenario,this promotes credit creation – because banks can borrow at very low interest rates under TLTROs onlyon the condition that they lend on – without hurting banks’ profitability and impairing monetarytransmission.The second issue we need to reflect on is interactions between monetary and fiscal policies. Whencentral banks have to use balance sheet policies extensively, there is an inevitable strengthening of theinterplay between monetary and fiscal policies. This interaction works both ways.Fiscal policy empowers monetary policy by fostering demand, which brightens economic prospects forfirms. This encourages them to borrow and allows them to fully benefit from monetary policy stimulus.And monetary policy makes fiscal policy more effective, because when monetary policy is at the lower
30/09/2020The monetary policy strategy review: some preliminary considerationshttps://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2020/html/ecb.sp200930~169abb1202.en.html6/7bound – and committed to staying there via forward guidance on rates and asset purchases – fiscalmultipliers are higher.[19]Indeed, one explanation for the superior inflation performance of the United States relative to the euroarea in recent times is that monetary and fiscal policies were more aligned. From 2013 to 2018, fiscalpolicy in the euro area tightened by around 2.5 percentage points of GDP, compared with a loosening ofaround 0.8 percentage points in the United States. ECB analysis for the euro area finds that, whilemonetary policy was supporting inflation during this period, it was being offset by demand headwinds.The implication is that, in the current environment, both policies must remain expansionary for as long asnecessary to achieve their respective goals. And, in disinflationary conditions when the economy isrunning short of its potential, the goals of each policy are naturally aligned.But if monetary and fiscal policies are interacting more closely, it also raises important questions –questions that will become even more acute in the aftermath of the pandemic. These include how to setpolicy in a world of possibly permanently higher levels of public debt, and the appropriate design ofEurope’s fiscal framework.Since restarting our strategy review, we have introduced a new work stream on monetary-fiscalinteractions precisely to address such questions.ConclusionLet me conclude.Today I have laid out some preliminary considerations that are guiding our strategy review. At this stage, itis too early to draw any firm conclusions. Rather, I have attempted to identify some of the key issues theGoverning Council will aim to address.There is one issue, however, on which I can be decisive today: we must explain much better to thegeneral public what we are doing and why, and we must talk to people that we do not normally reach.This imperative has to cascade through all the elements of our review: our inflation aim, our inflationmeasure, our tools and their effectiveness, and how we take into account new challenges that peoplecare about, like climate change or inequality.I am fully committed to this vision. Monetary policy can only be credible if we ensure that our goals aretruly understood and shared by the people we serve. As an independent central bank, we are and willremain accountable to them.[1]Rostagno, M., Altavilla, C., Carboni, G., Lemke, W., Motto, R., Saint Guilhem, A. and Yiangou, J. (2019), “A tale of two decades: theECB’s monetary policy at 20”, Working Paper Series, No 2346, ECB, Frankfurt am Main, December.[2]Budianto, F., Nakata, T. and Schmidt, S. (2020), “Average inflation targeting and the interest rate lower bound”, Working PaperSeries, No 2394, ECB, Frankfurt am Main, April.[3]Gabaix, X. (2020), “A Behavioral New Keynesian Model”, American Economic Review, Vol. 110, No 8, pp. 2271-2327.[4]Eser, F., Karadi, P., Lane, P.R., Moretti, L. and Osbat, C. (2020), “The Phillips Curve at the ECB”, Working Paper Series, No 2400,ECB, Frankfurt am Main, May.[5]Conti, A.M., Guglielminetti, E. and Riggi, M. (2019), “Labour productivity and the wageless recovery”, Working Papers, No 1257,Banca d’Italia.[6]Coibion, O., Gorodnichenko, Y. and Ulate, M. (2017), “The cyclical sensitivity in estimates of potential output”, NBER WorkingPaper, No 23580.[7]Galstyan, V. (2019), “Inflation and the current account in the euro area”, Economic Letter, Vol. 2019, No 4, Central Bank of Ireland.
30/09/2020The monetary policy strategy review: some preliminary considerationshttps://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2020/html/ecb.sp200930~169abb1202.en.html7/7[8]Jarocinski, M. and Lenza, M. (2018), “An inflation-predicting measure of the output gap in the euro area”, Journal of Money, Creditand Banking.[9]Bobeica, E., Ciccarelli, M. and Vansteenkiste, I. (2019), “The link between labor cost and price inflation in the euro area,” WorkingPaper Series, No 2235, European Central Bank, February; Hahn, E. (2019), “How are wage developments passed through to prices inthe euro area? Evidence from a BVAR model”, Applied Economics, preprint, published online on 1 November; Nickel, C., Bobeica, E.,Koester, G., Lis, E. and Porqueddu, M. (eds.) (2019), “Understanding low wage growth in the euro area and Europeancountries”, Occasional Paper Series, No 232, ECB, Frankfurt am Main, September.[10]Lis, E., Nickel, C. and Papetti, A. (2020), “Demographics and inflation in the euro area: a two-sector new Keynesianperspective”, Working Paper Series, No 2382, ECB, Frankfurt am Main, March; Bobeica, E. et al. (2017), “Demographics andinflation”, Working Paper Series, No 2006, ECB, Frankfurt am Main, January.[11]Forbes, K. (2019), “Has globalization changed the inflation process?”, BIS Working Papers, No 791, Bank for InternationalSettlements.[12]Anderton, R., Jarvis, V., Labhard, V., Morgan, J., Petroulakis, F. and Vivian, L. (2020), “Virtually everywhere: digitalisation and theeuro area and EU economies”, Occasional Paper Series, No 244, ECB, Frankfurt am Main, June.[13]Bobeica, E. et al., op. cit.[14]Goodhart, C. and Pradhan, M. (2020), The Great Demographic Reversal: Ageing Societies, Waning Inequality, and an InflationRevival, Palgrave Macmillan.[15]Candia, B., Coibion, O. and Gorodnichenko, Y. (2020), “Communication and the beliefs of economic agents”, paper presented atthe 2020 Economic Policy Symposium, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City; Duca, I.A., Kenny, G. and Reuter, A. (2018), “Inflationexpectations, consumption and the lower bound: micro evidence from a large euro area survey”, Working Paper Series, No 2196, ECB,Frankfurt am Main, November.[16]Brand, C., Bielecki, M. and Penalver, A. (2018), “The natural rate of interest: estimates, drivers and the challenges to monetarypolicy”, Occasional Paper Series, No 217, ECB, Frankfurt am Main, December.[17]Altavilla, C., Barbiero, F., Boucinha, M. and Burlon, L. (2020), “The great lockdown: pandemic response policies and bank lendingconditions”, Working Paper Series, No 2465, ECB, Frankfurt am Main, September.[18]Rostagno, M. et al., op. cit.[19]Blanchard, O. (2019), “Public Debt and Low Interest Rates”, AEA Presidential Lecture, January.
29/09/2020Women are central, not just in central bankshttps://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2020/html/ecb.sp200928~97c7e2ba27.en.html1/13SPEECHWomen are central, not just in central banksSpeech by Isabel Schnabel, Member of the Executive Board of the ECB, at the AnnualMeeting 2020 of the Verein für SocialpolitikFrankfurt am Main, 28 September 2020Economics is one of the fields in which women are underrepresented.[1] This has beenacknowledged for some time and numerous measures have been implemented to improve thesituation. Nevertheless, the substantial gender imbalance has proven to be very persistent. Sincecentral banks recruit mostly economics graduates, a similar imbalance is apparent in their staffnumbers – something that the European Central Bank (ECB) is determined to change.In my remarks today, I will start by summarising some of the underlying causes that contribute tothe underrepresentation of female economists overall. I will argue that this imbalance is a possiblereflection of overt and covert barriers to career progression, many at the institutional level. Theimbalance may also be reinforced by self-fulfilling expectations, whereby the low representation ofwomen at the top of the field discourages those at both entry level and at more advanced careerstages from continuing their careers, causing them to leave the profession prematurely.Based on the ECB’s experience, I will then argue that a targeted strategy can yield tangiblebenefits in the form of an improved gender balance. Data on the ECB’s workforce corroborate thisclaim. Following the announcement of a diversity strategy in 2010 and the introduction of explicitgender targets in 2013, the gender gap in the probability of promotion has decreased markedly.Our recently announced gender strategy for the period 2020-2026 seeks to build on theseencouraging results by setting ambitious targets for gender representation across the ECB’s entireorganisational hierarchy.There are a number of constructive steps that the profession can take to redress the genderimbalance and tackle diversity concerns more generally. Such steps include running effectivementoring or childcare programmes, fostering an inclusive culture and introducing gender targetsor quotas. The ECB is addressing all of these areas, but further progress is needed for ourworkforce to reflect the composition of the constituency that it ultimately serves – the people ofEurope.Taking stock: the gender imbalance in economicsIn 2019, women accounted for one third of newly granted economics PhDs in the United States, ashare that has not changed for a decade. Many women who start tenure track programmes ineconomics drop out before obtaining tenure, at a rate exceeding that of male economists and ofwomen in other disciplines. Data published by the American Economic Association suggest thatless than 15% of full professors in the United States are female.[2]In Europe, the picture is no different. Auriol, Friebel and Wilhelm (2019)[3] estimate that the shareof women in the profession is subject to a substantial attrition rate as the careers of femaleeconomists progress (sometimes referred to as the “leaky pipeline”).[4] Whereas the share ofwomen research associates is above 40%, the share of women holding full professorships isaround 22% (Figure 1). This effect seems to be even more pronounced at the top researchinstitutions: a recent study evaluating Europe’s top 20 economics departments estimates that theproportion of female professors at some of the continent’s most reputable research institutions isbelow 10%.[5]
29/09/2020Women are central, not just in central bankshttps://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2020/html/ecb.sp200928~97c7e2ba27.en.html2/13Figure 1Female share of research positions across Europe(in percentages)Source: Auriol, Friebel and Wilhelm (2019).Note: Consistent with the web-scraping methodology described in Friebel and Wilhelm (2019)[6], the data set isbased on information collected by monitoring the websites of all European institutions that contribute to researchin economics. For the top 300 European institutions (measured in terms of RePEc research output), the data setis substantiated by additional research to verify gender-specific information and position titles at the respectiveresearch institutions.Furthermore, the gender imbalance across the various sub-fields of economics is far fromhomogeneous. Studies typically find that the underrepresentation of women is most notable incertain specialisations, including macroeconomics and finance (Figure 2).[7] Both of these areasare highly relevant fields for the ECB’s recruitment strategy.Figure 2Female share across sub-fields of economics(in percentages)
29/09/2020Women are central, not just in central bankshttps://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2020/html/ecb.sp200928~97c7e2ba27.en.html3/13Source: Beneito, Boscá, Ferri and García (2018).Note: The analysis uses data based on the programs of the annual meetings of the American EconomicAssociationbetween 2010 and 2016. The data set includes the JEL codes of individual sessions as well as thenames of the authors. Based on the JEL codes, individual papers are classified into five sub-fields:Microeconomics (including both theoretical and empirical micro-oriented topics); Macroeconomics (includinginternational economics); Finance; Methods (mathematical and quantitative methods) and Other (a set ofmiscellaneous paper categories that do not fall into any of the other sub-fields). The names of the authors areclassified by gender using first-names databases.A number of explanations have been offered to rationalise the underrepresentation of women in theeconomics profession.[8] First, the share of women in economics degree courses remains lowerthan that of men, particularly in certain specialisations. The smaller pool of women at early careerstages is one reason why the share of men exceeds that of women at later career stages.However, this explanation clearly cannot account for the falling share of female economists overthe course of career trajectories. Second, it has been argued that gender-specific factors may havean impact, including the difference in preferences for operating in competitive environments or theharsher trade-off between family and career obligations faced by women.[9]The third explanation is that differential labour market outcomes for men and women emerge dueto the existence of overt or covert barriers, which may act as institutional hurdles, thus blockingwomen’s career progression. This could include the existence of a gender bias in hiring andpromotion decisions. The low share of successful female academics and professionals could inturn lead to the belief that women do not perform as well as men in the discipline, thus generatingself-fulfilling expectations.The third explanation is generally viewed as the most relevant and is corroborated by a substantialbody of evidence. For example, female authors face greater hurdles during the peer reviewprocess that determines publication and hence career success. Female-authored papers takelonger to complete the review process, but receive 25% more citations than similar male-authoredpapers. This suggests that female authors are held to higher standards during the review process,although there appears to be no systematic difference between male and female referees.[10] Women also seem to gain less credit for co-authored work. They are less likely to gain tenure
29/09/2020Women are central, not just in central bankshttps://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2020/html/ecb.sp200928~97c7e2ba27.en.html4/13the more co-authored works they produce, whereas co-authoring choices by men do not affecttheir tenure prospects.[11]Barriers to women within the profession may also be more insidious. Research on the languageused on the Economics Job Market Rumours website shows that posts about women contain onaverage around 40% fewer academic or professional terms and nearly 200% more personal orphysical terms. In other words, there is a systematic tendency to downplay the professionalcharacteristics of female economists.[12] Indeed, even where threads begin using professionalterms, they are more likely to switch to personal or physical terms if the subject of the thread isfemale.There is also evidence of other institutional barriers affecting women’s career progression, which Iwould like to illustrate by focusing on the ECB’s experiences over the past two decades.Female economists’ career progression at the ECBAs an institution, the ECB encapsulates the gender imbalance in economics. The ECB’s mainexecutive body – the Governing Council – is composed of the Governors of national central banks(NCBs) and the six Executive Board members. Since the ECB was founded, 63 NCB Governorshave served on the Governing Council, only one of whom has been female. The gender ratio of theExecutive Board (five women out of 24 members since the ECB’s inception) is slightly better, butstill far from balanced. In fact, the current Executive Board is the first to have two female membersserving simultaneously.Appointments to the Governing Council and the Executive Board are based on nominations atnational level. As a result, the gender balance in these executive bodies is not within our control.However, the ECB does determine the framework for appointments and career progression atlower levels of the organisation. Recent research using detailed internal data enables us to gain amuch better understanding of the factors influencing the relative career prospects of male andfemale economists.[13] It also allows us to assess the impact of the ECB’s diversity and genderstrategies.The ECB employs around 3,500 people,[14] and is one of the largest single employers of PhDeconomists in Europe. In 2010, the Executive Board undertook a marked policy shift towardsdiversity by issuing a public statement and adopting a diversity action plan. In 2013, this action planwas complemented with gender share targets by salary band, with the aim of meeting those targetsby end-2019.[15]PhD economists typically enter the ECB at Economist level (Band F/G), and subsequently progressto Team Lead (Band H) and Adviser (Band I).[16] Higher bands beyond Adviser are occupied byheads of division and senior managers.New entrants at Economist level typically join in their early 30s, many with a doctorate. Theaverage difference between male and female starting salaries at Economist level over the period2003-2017 is small – just over 1%, or five salary steps (Figure 3, left-hand panel).[17] But thegender pay gap increases markedly over time. After five years it reaches 25 steps, and after tenyears it reaches 29 steps – more than 7%, which translates into a substantial difference in annualsalary ‑ and continues to grow thereafter.Figure 3Wages since entry at Economist level (Band F/G), 2003-17
29/09/2020Women are central, not just in central bankshttps://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2020/html/ecb.sp200928~97c7e2ba27.en.html5/13(salary steps, across all Bands – left hand-side, within Band F/G – right-hand side)Source: Hospido, L., Laeven, L. and Lamo, A. (2019), op. cit.Note: The panel on the left-hand side shows the average salary step levels by gender since entry at Expert level(Band F/G) for all ECB employees included in the sample. The panel on the right-hand side illustrates theaverage salary step levels by gender since entry at Expert level (Band F/G) for those employees who remain atExpert level.An empirical evaluation of the ECB’s workforce data suggests that the divergence between maleand female salaries relates primarily to the likelihood of promotions over time. The importance ofpromotions for the wage gap is clearly illustrated by the co-movement of wages earned by maleand female staff economists who remain within the F/G salary band (Figure 3, right-hand panel).Starting from the F/G salary band, men’s probability of promotion after a ten year-career was 57%,whereas the promotion probability for women stood at a mere 37% over the same period (Figure4).Figure 4Probability of promotion from Band F/G, 2003-2017(in percentages)
29/09/2020Women are central, not just in central bankshttps://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2020/html/ecb.sp200928~97c7e2ba27.en.html6/13Source: Hospido, L., Laeven, L. and Lamo, A. (2019), op. cit.Note: The chart illustrates the average annual probability of promotion (moving from Expert level to Principalexpert or Adviser level) by gender since entry at Expert level (Band F/G) for all the ECB employees included inthe sample.However, the analysis also reveals the marked impact of the ECB’s recent initiatives relating todiversity and gender representation targets. Since 2011 and in stark contrast to the previous timeperiod, the difference between male and female promotion rates has been very small (Figure 5).Considering three-year rolling samples, the gap was positive and statistically significant in eachperiod up until 2010, and statistically insignificant in all three-year periods thereafter.Figure 5Gender gap in the probability of promotion from Band F/G, before 2011 and from 2011onwards(in percentages, probability of promotion from Economist (F/G) to Lead Economist or Adviser)
29/09/2020Women are central, not just in central bankshttps://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2020/html/ecb.sp200928~97c7e2ba27.en.html7/13Source: Hospido, L., Laeven, L. and Lamo, A. (2019), op. cit.Note: The chart illustrates the gender gap related to the average annual probability of promotion (moving fromExpert level to Principal expert or Adviser level) since entry at Expert level (Band F/G) before 2011 and from 2011onwards.Even taking into account this apparent convergence in promotion rates, the ECB’s diversity policydid not fully eradicate the differential in career prospects for men and women. An internal study ofpromotion campaigns between 2012 and 2017 reveals that women are less likely to apply forpromotion opportunities than men. Controlling for factors such as seniority in the respective salaryband and receipt of a performance-based bonus in the previous year, the application rate forpromotion by women is approximately 40% lower than the corresponding application rate for men.Given that the overall promotion rate is similar, the lower application rate by women for promotionopportunities implies a higher success rate for those that do apply. This begs the question whetherthe success of women at the ECB is due to positive discrimination or positive selection. In otherwords, are women being promoted because of their gender or because they are the most qualifiedcandidate irrespective of gender?An analysis of the ECB’s workforce data provides a clear indication of the underlying mechanism:on average, women benefit from faster pay progression following their promotion than men,pointing to a positive selection effect.[18] The criticism that this could be compensating for previouspay gaps following the introduction of the diversity policy also appears ill-founded. The relativelyfaster pay increases post-promotion for women were more marked prior to 2011, suggesting thatthe diversity policy announcement has had some success in encouraging qualified women, whohad previously been discouraged, to apply for promotion. Other studies have found that genderquotas reduce the share of less competent men in higher positions, without decreasing theaverage calibre of women.[19]As a result of the diversity and gender initiatives announced between 2010 and 2013, the ECB hasmade notable, but incomplete, progress in redressing its gender imbalance. At the end of 2019,women accounted for around 30% of all management positions (Band I-L) and 31% of senior
29/09/2020Women are central, not just in central bankshttps://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2020/html/ecb.sp200928~97c7e2ba27.en.html8/13management positions (Band K-L), up from 17% and 12% at the end of 2012, respectively (Figure6).Figure 6Proportion of women in ECB management positions (Band I-L, Band K-L)(in percentages)Source: ECB data.While the share of women across the ECB’s hierarchy has increased notably, it is neverthelessdisappointing to have missed most of our internal gender targets for 2019. It is therefore crucial toreflect on the key ways of building on past progress in order to attain a more balancedrepresentation of women and men at the ECB.Looking ahead: the ECB’s strategy for greater gender balanceThe impact of the ECB’s gender and diversity policy indicates that the overt and covert barriers tothe career progression of women are neither insurmountable nor irreversible. Academic researchand our own experience at the ECB suggest that several initiatives can be successful in redressingthe gender imbalance among those who pursue a career in economics.Addressing self-fulfilling expectations and institutional barriers to promotion
29/09/2020Women are central, not just in central bankshttps://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2020/html/ecb.sp200928~97c7e2ba27.en.html9/13ECB data indicate that women appear to be reluctant to apply for promotion opportunities. Thehigher success rate in promotions and in subsequent career steps suggests that substantialpayoffs could be achieved if women were more proactive in pursuing such opportunities. But theECB’s experience also shows the need for intervention policies and targets to steer outcomestowards a better equilibrium.Of course, expectations can prove hard to shift, and evidence suggests they may be fixed evenbefore students choose a subject at university. Among boys who score highly in maths or sciencein the 2018 PISA exercise, more than a quarter expect to be working in engineering or science bythe time they are 30, compared with fewer than one in six girls.[20] In every economy covered in the2012 exercise, parents were more likely to expect their sons than their daughters to work in aSTEM[21] field.To address self-fulfilling expectations in the economics profession, the ECB introduced a Women inEconomics scholarship in 2019.[22] The programme aims to support high-performing femalemaster’s students who may be prevented from pursuing their studies by financial constraints. Suchprogrammes can also help form expectations by allowing well-qualified female economists toprogress in their studies, thereby acting as role models for other women. In the same vein, currentECB staff members also regularly return to their secondary school to talk about their work.In line with these objectives, the ECB has recently overhauled its policy for internal promotions andappointments, including a revised set of gender targets for the period 2020-2026. Crucially, thesegender targets now also include intake targets (Table 1). Our rules foresee that each selectioncommittee for managerial recruitment campaigns includes at least two women. Under the newframework, senior managers are held accountable for ensuring that their business areas are ontrack to meet their individual targets.Table 1Gender share targets over time, 2020-2026(in percentages)
29/09/2020Women are central, not just in central bankshttps://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2020/html/ecb.sp200928~97c7e2ba27.en.html10/13Source: ECB data.Note: Status quo reflects data as of Q4 2019.Expanding mentoring programmesThere is evidence that female economists benefit from dedicated mentoring opportunities. Forexample, female economists who take part in such programmes seem to have a better chance ofreceiving grant funding and being published in top-tier journals.[23] At the ECB, those who are partof the mentoring programme are also more likely to apply for internal promotion.[24]To reinforce the effects of informal networks on career progression, the ECB’s revised gender anddiversity strategy also institutes a mentoring programme with an initial focus on women. As part ofits ongoing efforts to ensure greater gender balance, the ECB is also expanding itsexisting Women in Leadershiptraining programme.Even in the absence of such formalised programmes, I encourage especially, but not only, femaleeconomists to proactively seek out potential mentors to gain insights, advice and encouragement.For example, university students who come across an intriguing ECB Working Paper in a relatedfield of research might want to reach out to the authors for advice on their own research projects.Ensuring effective childcareParental responsibilities can be a significant impediment to career progression, particularly forwomen. Research shows that childcare can have a sustained impact on the career and salarytrajectory of women. However, employers can take concrete steps to mitigate these effects.
29/09/2020Women are central, not just in central bankshttps://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2020/html/ecb.sp200928~97c7e2ba27.en.html11/13The ECB subsidises childcare for its staff, ensuring that parents can entrust their offspring tocrèches with well-qualified staff and opening hours that match a standard working day. It has alsoinstituted generous policies for flexible working hours as well as parental and unpaid leave.Fostering an inclusive cultureFinally, efforts to redress the gender imbalance in economics are just one element of ensuring amore inclusive and diverse organisational culture. The ECB’s 2010 action plan and our current setof policies support diversity more broadly, clearly going beyond the numerical gender targets.The institutional barriers I have mentioned not only affect women, but also economists from diverseethnic backgrounds, those with disabilities and many others who may face challenges in pursuing acareer within the economics profession.Creating a culture in which diverse points of view and a wide range of skills are valued is essential– not just to redress the persistent gender imbalance in the profession, but also to protect againstinstitutional groupthink, thus safeguarding the quality of the ECB’s monetary policy decisions.ConclusionI would now like to conclude my remarks.The gender imbalance in economics is a long-standing and persistent phenomenon. A growingbody of academic research substantiates the claim that this gender imbalance is caused by bothovert and covert barriers that limit the career progression of women. If left unaddressed, thesebarriers will continue to culminate in self-fulfilling expectations, perpetuating the flawed belief thatwomen are less suited to succeeding in the profession than men.However, the ECB’s experience clearly shows that these barriers are not insurmountable. TheECB’s announcement of an explicit diversity policy in 2010, as well as the introduction of gendertargets in 2013, had a marked impact, closing the observed promotion gap between men andwomen. The institution has also moved towards a more balanced representation of men andwomen across the ECB’s organisational hierarchy. Progress has been notable, albeit slow andimperfect.As in other academic disciplines, the gender imbalance in economics and its associatedprofessions has deep-rooted, systemic causes. Concerted efforts to encourage women to pursue acareer in the profession at an early stage, combined with concrete steps to retain and encouragethose that have already started a career, are likely to bolster the share of women in the discipline.The ECB is doing its part in pursuing ambitious initiatives that support the career progression ofwomen within the institution. However, our internal promotion guidelines do not address the genderimbalance in economics at its root. The pool of applicants from which the ECB recruits remainslopsided in favour of men, with a very low share of female graduates in sub-fields related to ourcore policy areas, an issue to be tackled at universities.The systemic nature of women’s underrepresentation implies that the ECB’s gender strategy canonly be one element of broader institutional and societal changes that are needed to ensure thesustained advancement of women and to encourage diversity more generally.Thank you for your attention.[1]I would like to thank Miles Parker for his contributions to this speech.
29/09/2020Women are central, not just in central bankshttps://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2020/html/ecb.sp200928~97c7e2ba27.en.html12/13[2]CSWEP (2019), The 2019 Report of the Committee on the Status of Women in the Economics Profession, AmericanEconomic Association, December.[3]Auriol, Friebel and Wilhelm (2019) “Women in European Economics”, mimeo.[4]See also Ginther, D. K. and S. Kahn (2004): “Women in Economics: Moving Up or Falling Off the AcademicLadder”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 18(3), pp. 193–214.[5]See Birekeraho, A. and Maniga, P. (2018), “How many female economics professors in top European Universities?”,Bruegel, March.[6]Friebel, G. and Wilhelm, S. (2019), “The Women in European Economics Monitoring Tool: Technical Description”, WorkingPaper.[7]Beneito, P., Boscá, J. E., Ferri, J. and García, M. (2018), “Women across Subfields in Economics: Relative Performanceand Beliefs”, Working Papers 2018-06, FEDEA; Dolnado, J. J., Felgueroso, F. and Almunia, M. (2012), “Are men and women-economists evenly distributed across research fields? Some new empirical evidence”, Journal of the Spanish EconomicAssociation, 3, pp. 367-393.[8]For a succinct summary of these explanations and additional references, see also: Hospido, L., Laeven, L., and Lamo, A.(2019), “The gender promotion gap: evidence from central banking”, Working Paper Series, 2265, European Central Bank.[9]This includes both psychological and physiological reasons. For example, see Sapienza, P., Zingales, L. and Maestripieri,D. (2009), “Gender differences in financial risk aversion and career choices are affected by testosterone”, Proceedings of theNational Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 8 September, 106 (36), pp. 15268-15273; Niederle, M. andVesterlund, L. (2007), “Do Women Shy Away from Competition? Do Men Compete Too Much?”, Quarterly Journal ofEconomics, 122(3), pp. 1067–1101. For a reference relating to the trade-off between family and career faced by women, seeBertrand, M. (2013), “Career, Family, and the Well-Being of College Educated Women”, American Economic Review, 103(3),pp. 244-250.[10]Card, D., DellaVigna, S., Funk, P. and Iriberri, N (2020), “Are Referees and Editors in Economics Gender Neutral?”, TheQuarterly Journal of Economics, 135(1), pp. 269-327.[11]Sarsons, H. (2017), “Recognition for Group Work: Gender Differences in Academia”, American Economic Review, 107(5),pp. 141-145.[12]Wu, A.H. (2019), “Gender bias in rumors among professionals: an identity-based interpretation”, Review of Economicsand Statistics, April. See also the forthcoming publication at https://doi.org/10.1162/rest_a_00877.[13]Hospido, L. Laeven, L. and Lamo, A. (2019), op. cit.[14]On a permanent or fixed-term basis. In addition, there are staff on temporary contracts or secondments. Overallheadcount is currently higher than during the period studied in Hospido et al. (2019), ibid, following the creation of the SingleSupervisory Mechanism.[15]The ECB’s diversity statement begins: “Diversity is a key contributor to our success. As a European Union institution, theECB aspires to be an organisation in which diversity is welcomed and appreciated in all its facets for the richness that it offers.The facets of diversity include – but are not limited to – gender, nationality, religion, sexual orientation, ethnic origin, age,cultural background and disability. The ECB wishes to be a workplace where staff members feel included and respected, andthat their individual talents are valued, developed and rewarded. The promotion of diversity is considered to enrich the qualityof work and to add value to the ECB’s decision-making.”[16]The terms used in this speech for ranks are simplifications for the sake of clarity. Depending on the department, staff maybe referred to as experts rather than economists. Band I also includes Heads of Section and Deputy Heads of Division.[17]Up until 2020, salary on appointment to the ECB was determined by a fixed formula based on education and previouswork experience.[18]Hospido, L., Laeven, L. and Lamo, A. (2019), op. cit.
29/09/2020Women are central, not just in central bankshttps://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2020/html/ecb.sp200928~97c7e2ba27.en.html13/13[19]Besley, T., Folke, O., Persson, T. and Rickne, J. (2017), “Gender Quotas and the Crisis of the Mediocre Man: Theory andEvidence from Sweden”, American Economic Review, 107(8), pp. 2204-2242.[20]Schleicher, A. (2018), “PISA 2018: Insights and Interpretations”, Organisation for Economic Cooperation andDevelopment, Paris.[21]Science, technology, engineering and mathematics.[22]For more information, see Women in Economics Scholarship. Applications for scholarships in the 2021-22 academic yearwill open in March 2021.[23]Blau, F., Currie, J., Croson, R. and Ginther, D. (2010), “Can Mentoring Help Female Assistant Professors? Interim Resultsfrom a Randomized Trial”, American Economic Review, 100(2), pp. 348-352.[24]Hospido, L. Laeven, L. and Lamo, A. (2019), op. cit.
Christine Lagarde: Hearing at the Committee on Economic andMonetary Affairs of the European ParliamentIntroductory statement (by videoconference) by Ms Christine Lagarde, President of the EuropeanCentral Bank, at the ECON Committee of the European Parliament, Frankfurt am Main, 28September 2020.*   *   *Madam Chair,Honourable members of the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee,Ladies and gentlemen,Thank you very much for giving me the opportunity to speak to you today and to have a frank andtimely discussion about the ECB’s monetary policy, as befits the topics you have chosen for thishearing.After a few words on the euro area economic outlook, I will focus my remarks today on theECB’s monetary policy and in particular on the role of asset purchases, before sharing somereflections on the ECB’s accountability arrangements.The euro area economic outlookThe impact of the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic is still being felt across the euro area.Businesses are facing difficulties, people are losing their jobs, and prospects about the futureremain uncertain.While euro area economic activity rebounded in the third quarter, the recovery remainsincomplete, uncertain and uneven. Consumer spending has resumed significantly, butconsumers remain cautious owing to anxiety about their job and income prospects. Similarly,business investment has been picking up, but weaker demand and elevated uncertainty continueto weigh on firms’ investment plans.In this context, job retention schemes and national guarantees on bank loans remain criticallyimportant factors in reducing uncertainty and softening the impact of the pandemic.The latest ECB staff projections foresee annual real GDP growth at –8.0% in 2020, 5.0% in 2021and 3.2% in 2022. Euro area real GDP is only expected to recover to pre-crisis levels in late2022. The strength of the recovery remains, however, highly dependent on the evolution of theCOVID-19 pandemic and the success of containment policies. The public health crisis willcontinue to weigh on economic activity and poses downside risks to the economic outlook.The sharp drop in economic activity earlier this year has weakened price pressures. Annualheadline inflation in the euro area stood at –0.2% in August and is expected to remain negativeover the coming months, reflecting the effects of earlier declines in energy prices, a strongereuro, and a temporary reduction in the value-added tax rate in Germany. ECB staff project annualinflation to gradually increase, from an average of 0.3% in 2020, to an average of 1.0% in 2021and 1.3% in 2022.The ECB’s monetary policyThe monetary policy measures that we have taken since early March are providing crucialsupport to the economic recovery and are helping to safeguard medium-term price stability.Without our measures, we would be facing a deeper economic contraction and more severe12 1 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
disinflation. Our policy support during the crisis has been structured along two main axes:liquidity operations and asset purchases.First, we have provided access to central bank liquidity at very favourable terms and over longtenors to help maintain the supply of credit from the banking sector. To this end, we haveadjusted the terms and conditions of our targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO III),which strengthen the incentives for banks to lend to the real economy. For a year, banks will beable to borrow at negative rates, which can be as low as –1% on the condition that they lend tothe economy. Largely in response to this recalibration, we have seen a very high take-up bybanks.And second, we have launched the pandemic emergency purchase programme (PEPP) toensure the smooth transmission of our monetary policy and to ease the overall monetary policystance thereby helping to offset the downward impact of the pandemic on the projected path ofinflation. The PEPP, launched with an initial envelope of €750 billion in March, was increased by€600 billion in June to a total of €1,350 billion. We will conduct net asset purchases under thePEPP until at least the end of June 2021 and, in any case, until the Governing Council judgesthat the coronavirus crisis phase is over. In the current environment of elevated uncertainty, theGoverning Council will carefully assess all incoming information, including developments in theexchange rate, with regard to its implications for the medium-term inflation outlook. It continues tostand ready to adjust all of its instruments, as appropriate, to ensure that inflation moves towardsits aim in a sustained manner, in line with its commitment to symmetry.The ECB’s accountability arrangementsThe ECB has been able to deliver a strong policy response during the crisis thanks in part to itsability to act in full independence, as set out in the Treaty. This independence in turn relies oneffective accountability mechanisms to ensure that the ECB fully pursues its mandate, as alsoenshrined in the Treaty.Delivering on the ECB’s Treaty obligations is a shared challenge for both the ECB and theEuropean Parliament. While requiring effort and commitment from both sides, it is in both ourinstitutions’ interest.To be effective in assessing the ECB’s actions and relaying people’s concerns, accountabilitypractices need to meet three criteria. First, they need to be commensurate with the ECB’s tasksand responsibilities, implying that they have to evolve in line with the complexity and scale of theECB’s measures. Second, they need to be underpinned by timely and adequate information andtransparency arrangements. And third, they need to be based on mutual trust to ensureconstructive discussions on critical and difficult issues.Over the years, our two institutions have worked together to build and strengthen theiraccountability relationship, well beyond the requirements of the Treaty. Indeed, I would argue thatthis relationship meets the three criteria I have just spelled out.First of all, the ECB’s accountability practices have evolved over time. With the launch ofEuropean banking supervision in 2014, specific accountability arrangements were established forthe ECB’s supervisory arm. We also strengthened our relationship to reflect the greatercomplexity of the ECB’s monetary policy measures. For example, when the ECB was takingunprecedented action during the exceptional circumstances caused by the pandemic, I held anad hoc exchange of views with the political group coordinators of this Committee. Moreover, wehave agreed to interact more closely in the context of the ECB’s strategy review and ensure thatour regular dialogues play a key role in how we inform about the exercise. The outcome of thereview will also provide an opportunity for us to consider the ECB’s accountability practices.The ECB’s accountability has also been enhanced by a better flow of information between our34 2 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
two institutions. As we discussed last February, this requires us to continuously aspire tocommunicate as clearly and as openly as possible. As part of this endeavour and also inresponse to parliamentary and public demands, the ECB has already started providing moredetailed information about its asset purchases and current holdings on its website.Today I can announce an additional transparency measure. From now on, we will publish on ourwebsite the opinions of the ECB Ethics Committee for cases of conflict of interest and post-mandate gainful employment by the members of the ECB’s Executive Board, Governing Counciland Supervisory Board. This new initiative complements the single Code of Conduct for high-level ECB officials and demonstrates our strong commitment to integrity and good governance. Itwill facilitate public scrutiny, thereby enhancing trust in the ECB and ultimately in its decisions.This leads me on to my final point on good working relations requiring trust. Trust, on the onehand, that criticism of the ECB reflects concerns raised by European citizens on matters that fallwithin the ECB’s mandate. And trust, on the other hand, that the ECB listens and takes suchcriticism into account. This trust forms the basis for our constructive dialogue, both formal andinformal, and ensures that our relationship delivers. And so it does: in response to your call forthe ECB to reflect on ways of reducing the reporting burden associated with the collection ofstatistical and prudential data – an activity which costs the banking sector several billion euroeach year – we proposed practical solutions in cooperation with other European authorities andthe banking industry, while improving the quality of the data collected.At the very beginning of my term of office, you invited the ECB – in full respect of its mandate andindependence – to reflect on how its policies could support the green transition. The ECB’sGoverning Council has now decided that, from 2021, the Eurosystem will accept bonds withcoupons linked to certain sustainable performance targets as collateral for credit operations andoutright purchases for monetary policy purposes, provided that they comply with all othereligibility criteria.Building on these three criteria, we should continue to do what we have been doing all along:ensuring that our accountability practices remain commensurate by letting them evolve in aflexible manner and by adapting them in line with the demands for scrutiny from Europeancitizens.And because we can only make improvements if we are aware of people’s expectations andconcerns in relation to the ECB and its policies, we are inviting everyone in the euro area toshare their ideas and comments through the ECB Listens portal on our website.ConclusionLet me conclude.Our regular exchanges are crucial in explaining the ECB’s actions to people across Europe andto you as their representatives.This is even truer in testing times when the people of Europe expect the EU to rise to thechallenge. A recent survey commissioned by this Parliament shows that more than two-thirds ofEuropeans would like to see the EU have more competences to deal with crises such as theCOVID-19 pandemic. Citizens clearly look to the EU for answers and you play a central role inensuring that such answers are forthcoming.The measures adopted thus far by national governments and the European institutions arereinforcing our policies. At the same time, our policies are creating the most favourableconditions for the full impact of structural and fiscal policies to be felt.The Parliament’s calls for an ambitious European response were heard by European leaders. It456 3 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
will now be important to ensure that the Next Generation EU funds are used not only in a timelyfashion, but also in a way that enhances long-term growth and supports common EU objectives.If we get it right, Next Generation EU could be just the game changer that Europe needs – interms of modernisation, resilience and prosperity.Dossche, M. and Zlatanos, S. (2020), “COVID-19 and the increase in household savings: precautionary orforced?”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 6, ECB.ECB staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area, September 2020.Fraccaroli, N. et al. (2018), “The evolution of the ECB’s accountability practices during the crisis”, EconomicBulletin, Issue 5, ECB.Introductory statement by Christine Lagarde, President of the ECB, at the ECON committee of the EuropeanParliament, Brussels, 6 February 2020.Available on the ECB’s website.See “ECB proposes to reduce reporting burden for banks and increase data quality”, press release, 21September 2020.123456 4 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
John C Williams: Building an equitable futureRemarks (via videoconference) by Mr John C Williams, President and Chief Executive Officer ofthe Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at the Economic Inequality Policy Forum: The Impacts ofCOVID-19 on Communities of Color and Policy Insights for an Equitable Economic Recovery, 24September 2020.*   *   *Hello everyone, and welcome to the New York Fed’s third Economic Inequality Policy Forum. It’sa pleasure to speak with all of you who are joining us for this conversation. For me, today’s eventis about sharing research and hearing your recommendations, so I’m going to keep my openingremarks brief.Before I continue, let me give the disclaimer that the views I express are mine alone and do notnecessarily reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee or anyone else in the FederalReserve System.Since the outbreak of the pandemic, we’ve seen severe economic pain, unprecedented levels ofunemployment, and enormous uncertainty about the future. The health and economic effects ofCOVID-19 have created tremendous hardship for many Americans across the country, but theyhave been especially painful for communities of color.We know that people of color and Black people in particular have experienced higher rates ofillness and death. Significant representation in essential services work and insufficient access tohealthcare are key factors that have contributed to these outcomes. The pandemic’sconvergence with a moment of reckoning for the United States around racial justice makesconversations on issues like equitable growth even more important and relevant.When I think about equitable growth, I think about an economy where everyone can realize theirfull economic potential. While today’s conversation is about equitable recovery, everyone here isaware that an equitable economy did not exist before the pandemic. Another important dimensionof equitable growth is equal access. And the pandemic exposed just how dramatic the fault linesin racial disparities are, for access to things like healthcare, credit, and housing.Recent research by the New York Fed revealed that Black-owned businesses are almost twiceas likely to shutter during COVID-19 as white-owned firms. Black-owned businesses are alsomore likely to be located in coronavirus hot spots. I’m hearing about how these statistics areplaying out for families through regular conversations with community leaders like many of you inour district and beyond. Far too many are facing unemployment, losing access to theirhealthcare, and dealing with the threat of eviction.Structural inequality stifles growth, but there is no single silver bullet that can solve the problemslaid bare by the pandemic. As we look ahead to a full recovery from the downturn, we need to seta stronger foundation. We need more investment in health, in education—especially in theearliest years—in infrastructure, and in training and skills for well-paying jobs.There is so much work that needs to be done to make sure that we are fostering an equitablerecovery and ensuring that everyone is able to fulfill their economic potential.That’s why at the New York Fed and across the Federal Reserve System, a key area of focus isto better understand what contributes to economic inequities and to finding solutions.Our economic research and analysis, which my colleagues will share shortly, highlights many ofthese stark disparities. In addition, hosting conversations like this one creates dialogue aroundthese issues and builds connections between those working for change.1234 1 / 2BIS central bankers' speeches
Another important role the Federal Reserve plays in promoting economic equity and access issupervising banks with respect to the Community Reinvestment Act. This law requires banks tolend, invest, and offer services to low- and moderate-income communities in areas where thebanks operate.To emphasize all of our work in this space, the New York Fed recently published a statementreinforcing our commitment to fostering a more equitable economy and society:The New York Fed stands in unity with all those who oppose racism, hate, andviolence. We join them in a shared desire to root out the intolerable inequities andinjustice grounded in systemic racism that persist in our society. We are firm in thebelief that economic equality is a critical component for social justice and that we willnever have the truly inclusive and strong economy we seek until access to health,education, safety, and justice knows no racial or other boundaries. We are dedicatedto understanding and finding solutions to the numerous forms of inequality thatcommunities of color experience and working with communities in our District toaddress deep-seated inequities. We are steadfast in our commitment to work for amore equitable economy and society for all, and will redouble our efforts in pursuit ofthis essential mission.The pandemic painfully demonstrates the need for us to redouble our efforts in working withstakeholders from the community, business, nonprofits, and governments to build a stronger,more equitable foundation for our economy’s future. This makes conversations like the ones weare having today so important for us to listen to and learn from. Our shared commitment to anequitable recovery is needed now more than ever.Coronavirus in African Americans and Other People of Color, Johns Hopkins Medicine, April 20, 2020.Claire Kramer Mills and Jessica Battisto, Double Jeopardy: COVID-19’s Concentrated Health and Wealth Effectsin Black Communities, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, August 2020.Economic Inequality & Equitable Growth, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.Heterogeneity: A Multi-Part Research Series on Liberty Street Economics, Federal Reserve Bank of New York,accessed August 8, 2020.About the New York Fed: Announcements, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, June 12, 2020.  512345 2 / 2BIS central bankers' speeches
    Keynote address by François Villeroy de Galhau,  Gouverneur de la Banque de France, Official Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum  webinar, 25 September 2020 « ROLE OF CENTRAL BANKS IN THE HEART OF THE ECOSYSTEM i »           Contact presse : Mark Deen (mark.deen@banque-france.fr), Déborah Guedj (deborah.guedj@banque-france.fr) 
Page 2 sur 10  Good morning and welcome to this webinar, jointly organized by the Official Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum and the Banque de France. What better way to demonstrate the digital transformation than holding an event in cyberspace. It has been common in recent years to hear about disruptive technologies but over the past 6 months, information technology has instead been a crucial source of continuity in a highly disrupted world.  Digitalization is one among many factors transforming central banking and this will be my broader theme this morning. The ECB Strategic Review rightly launched by Christine Lagarde, with an explicit list of challengesii, is the opportunity to reflect on how the Eurosystem should respond to them. The shocks that have hit the economy in the past decade have been unprecedented, but in hindsight, many long-term structural shifts were occurring that have caused the unstable and complex situation we face today. Global natural interest rates had already been falling since the early 1980s driven by the demographic transition and risk-aversion in key emerging markets. Digitalisation and globalisation, combined, have been pressing for “lowflation”. Financial vulnerabilities were also steadily, but invisibly, rising since the so-called Great Moderation. Indeed, it seems that excess demand now shows up in asset prices before wages or inflation, complicating the trade-offs between price stability and financial stability.  However, it would be remiss of me not to briefly mention the short-term challenges that we currently face.  Confronting this unprecedented Covid crisis, we acted boldly and rapidly, using all the tools at our disposal and inventing new ones such as the PEPP. By doing so, we successfully avoided both fragmentation and deflation. That said, inflation is not yet where we would like it to be, back towards 2% over the medium term. Have no doubt about our determination to act as much as needed, and about our capacity to act. Again this Autumn, we are hearing chatter about the ECB running out of ammunition. It proved completely wrong in March, and it remains wrong today. If needed, the ECB has ample room for manœuvre. By 
Page 3 sur 10  the way, the yesterday's take up (EUR 174 bn) of our TLTRO-3 confirms the attractiveness and the adequacy of this innovative tool. We decided to keep a steady hand in the last Governing Council due to the continuity of our economic forecasts. But steady hands are not tied hands: we have free hands for the future. ** Let me now come to the ECB’s strategic review, on which work has restarted after the peak of the Covid crisis. It is more extensive than the FOMC’s as it will cover, among many things, structural change; climate change; financial stability; and the effects of digitalization. The Eurosystem will take its time, as the Fed did, to consider the different alternatives. What professional economists find theoretically appealing may not be either easily applicable or comprehensible to the general public. What financial markets expect in the short run is not always consistent with long-term economic objectives.   But let me try today to share some preliminary thoughts on four key questions: 1. Is there such a difference between a dual mandate and the ECB’s two-tiered mandate? 2. How could we clarify the inflation objective? 3. What about the “second pillar” of the ECB and is there a link with the so-called “secondary” objectives? 4. Last but not least, how can we improve communication with the general public and economic actors? My aim obviously is not to give you conclusive answers to these four questions but to highlight important elements of the debate. The Fed’s conclusions are a significant part of it but one shouldn’t assume that the ECB will simply follow suit. Other contributions – such as the ECB Listens exercise, our academic roundtables, Sintra or the current review of the Bank of Canada – are also important and differences are not always where expected.  
Page 4 sur 10  1. Is there such a difference in mandates? For most observers, including politicians, this is the most striking issue: the Fed has a dual mandate, including price stability and maximum employment, and the strategy review shifted its emphasis to the latter. The ECB, meanwhile, has a primary objective of price stability, according to the Treaties. Of course it is our duty to stick to the Treaties and our strategic review won’t deviate an inch from them. However let me only remind you that our legal mandate is not, as often assumed, a purely “single mandate”: it is rather a two-tiered one  that includes at least two other objectives without prejudice to price stability: “to support the general economic policies in the Union” contributing among other aims to a “social market economy, aiming at full employment and social progress”iii; and “the stability of the financial system”iv Furthermore, I would argue that there is less of a difference between a dual mandate and flexible inflation targeting than people think: noticeably, the measures we have taken to offset the effects of negative shocks such as the Global Financial Crisis or the sanitary crisis have a direct effect on growth and employment. As far as demand shocks are concerned, the monetary policy prescriptions are the same. In principle there are conflicts when there are supply shock but inflation targeting central banks also tend not to react to temporary supply shocks but respond only if there are signs of second-round effects. The ECB also takes note of estimates of the natural rate of unemployment but recognizes that these are subject to enormous uncertainty – like estimates of all other “natural” variables. The ECB would not tighten policy based solely on an estimated unemployment gap. 2. How could we clarify the price stability objective? The main substantive change by the FOMC is the introduction of an inflation make-up strategy. Rather than being solely forward-looking, the FOMC will, or could, now correct for past inflation shortfalls. Let us here also discuss the areas 
Page 5 sur 10  of continuity as Jay Powell did in his speech of 27 Augustv – and the possible differences:  The Fed confirmed our common strategy of inflation targeting and it has kept 2% as its numerical goal. This “conceptual  convergence” remains a cornerstone of modern central banking.  Average inflation targeting is a flexible tactic, possibly temporary, within a wider strategy of keeping inflation sustainably where expected. Still more importantly in my view, the inflation target should be perceived as flexible, symmetric and medium term. Allow me to be a bit more specific about these three requirements. o flexible is the most obvious one. We cannot guarantee to achieve precisely our numerical objective either all the time or straight away. o Symmetric means that our numerical objective is a target and not a ceiling. As a consequence we might be ready to accept inflation higher than 2% for some time, without mechanically triggering a tightening of our monetary stance. Commentators sometimes attribute a perceived asymmetry to our current definition of price stability “below, but close to, 2%”. The Governing Council has frequently re-affirmed its commitment to symmetry – as it stands in our Introductory Statement since Mario Draghi. Nevertheless, we should examine whether the current formulation casts doubt on this. o medium term means that we should judge our inflation performance over a long enough period. We shouldn’t forget what Jean-Claude Trichet often stressed as an optimal performance in the first years of the euro. “Over these 12 years, the average annual inflation rate in the euro area has been 1.97%. We have achieved price stability in the euro area over what has already been quite a long horizon.”vi As I said in previous occasionsvii, our medium-term target needs to be viewed in two ways: it has to be forward looking to guide inflation expectations, but it cannot ignore the past either. 
Page 6 sur 10  All this is not explicit average inflation targeting ex ante, but would achieve very similar outcomes ex post. We will have to discuss that.  We will also have to discuss the precise formulation of our inflation objective, in at least two respects: the “below but close to” as already mentioned and the measure of inflation we use. Continuity is a positive asset but the inclusion of “owner-occupied housing” in the HICP is frequently, and somewhat rightly, suggested by the general public. As you are aware, the preferred inflation measure of the Fed, the PCE index, includes these expenditures.   Last but not least, our inflation objective while clarified should also be credible. I will come back to this with my fourth question about communication. 3. What about the second pillar of the ECB and is there a link with “secondary objectives”? For many, the history of the second pillar of monetary analysis of the ECB seems to be coming to an end. Born as the first pillar in 1999 and coming at the time from the strict following of monetary aggregates by the Bundesbank – and the Banque de France as well –, it became the second pillar after 2003, passing behind the economic analysis of the inflation outlook. And due to the fact that it has progressively fallen into disuse, many suggest we should now call time on it during our strategic review.  Is it that sure? Isn’t there another alternative path, more adequate than letting it disappear? There are three possible reasons:  The second pillar allows a cross check on the analysis of inflation.  We could possibly introduce a focus on nominal aggregates, whereas the first pillar focuses by its nature on prices and volumes.  Finally, it would allow reference to some of the “secondary” objectives of the ECB, including financial stability. In our discussion to come, I believe we could study two types of aggregates: 
Page 7 sur 10   Financial aggregates, from the perspective of financial stability, and potentially looking more closely at the assets of financial institutions including non-banks (such as their provision of credit in the broadest sense) rather than at their liabilities only (including money, as in the past).  Other economic aggregates, starting with nominal GDP, which has the virtue of combining real growth and prices – two variables that statisticians sometimes have difficulties separating in our measures. But also employment and income distribution, which respond to the demands of the Treaties as well as to the expectations of the public. Allow me some remarks on the substance of these “secondary” objectives. To achieve financial stability, in an ideal world, we would have a box of macroprudential tools that could maintain financial stability whatever the monetary policy stance. However, in practice our set of macroprudential tools is comparatively limited. We need a monetary policy strategy that reflects this reality. We should go beyond the old debate of “separation principle” versus “ leaning against the wind”. I advocate a median way, which we could call “coordinated” or “integrated”.viii We have now a range of unconventional monetary instruments and our objective should be to pick the right combination that delivers the necessary accommodative monetary stance while minimizing of adverse side-effects on financial stability. TLTRO’s and the tiering system we use today for refinancing the Eurozone banks are two good examples in this respect. On climate change, the emphasis put by Christine Lagardeix herself is welcome and totally warranted. In my view, the fight against global warming is already an imperative for us under our price stability mandate: not only will the effects of climate change have significant repercussions on future inflation and growth, but they are already having an impact now. We could implement our climate decisions in no more than 3 to 5 years, which would make us pioneers among major Central banks.  
Page 8 sur 10  4. How to improve communication with the general public? My final remarks concern communication. Central banks have come a long way in being transparent about their decisions and explaining their reasoning. However, our communication is too often addressed to a narrow group of people – the media, the markets and economists. We need to do a better job of reaching the general public. And this means two changes of paradigm:   it is not only a question of democratic accountability – however essential this remains –, it is also key for our economic efficiency. Better-informed firms and households will also make better decisions and ones more aligned with our strategy, I will come back to it.   Secondly, we should evolve from a narrow objective of “transparency” to a wider objective of “clarity”. This means focusing on what is heard rather than what is said: we cannot merely “publish and go”. As Tiff Macklem, my Canadian colleague, says “Public communications should be in plain language and free of jargon. We should speak as public servants and peers, not as oracles delivering messages from an ivory tower.”x And effective speaking also requires active listening.  At the start of next year, consistent with the ECB endeavours, we will host a number of “Banque de France listens” events in all regions to hear what French citizens and SMEs think about inflation and monetary policy. We will then adjust our communication depending on what we hear. Let me elaborate on the economic stakes of this communication. Our inflation targeting policy will be significantly more efficient if economic agents, be they households or businesses, do actually understand it, accept it and believe it. Hence it should be seen as clear, legitimate and credible. I insisted earlier on clarification (question 2), let me now conclude with legitimacy and credibility. One of the most difficult challenges for a central bank with a price stability mandate is how to explain a positive inflation objective. The general public often does not understand why a central bank would deliberately try to increase inflation. We need to explain better that although our price stability objective is 
Page 9 sur 10  defined in terms of HICP inflation, we are actually seeking a general average increase in all nominal variables, including wages and nominal GDP. Few people spontaneously want an increase in consumer prices, but most do want an increase in their nominal incomes. Furthermore, households, firms, financial institutions and governments enter nominal contracts (negotiate wages, take out mortgages, buy sovereign debt etc) based on expected inflation. If actual inflation is higher or lower than these expectations, then wealth and income are transferred from one group to the other. The best way to be neutral is to announce a target that can efficiently guide expectations.  To a non-economist, price stability would imply targeting zero inflation. However, we need to explain why targeting zero inflation is not ideal. Real wage adjustments can be necessary to maintain competitiveness and sustain employment and this real adjustment is easier to achieve with a positive inflation rate. This is still more important in a monetary union in which real adjustments are necessary to maintain internal balance. The effective lower bound (ELB) on nominal interest rates would also be reached more frequently, putting a constraint on the use of monetary policy. But I do acknowledge that using the ELB argument at, say a family lunch on Sunday, is easier said than done. Last but not least, credibility. Here, households and firms have mixed feelings: they believe that actual inflation is much higher than central banks and statistics institutes claim; and they doubt we will deliver the “close to 2%”in the future. Distrust is too often the name of the game. Here, let us again listen and speak. First listen to the inflation expectations of households and firms: we don’t measure them properly today, although they are of the essence for economic transmission of monetary policy, as households and firms are the actual price- and wage-setters.  Indeed, their price expectations are quite different from those of financial markets we tend to focus on.  Listen and then speak: once a central bank has committed to a target, it must use every tool available to deliver on it and explain clearly that the transmission of the monetary impulse to the economy entails some delays. We are all 
Page 10 sur 10  convinced that a credible inflation objective makes stabilizing inflation easier because the objective anchors inflation expectations. Let us convince our fellow citizens of our determination, “in plain language” – I hope my remarks today help somewhat to initiate this essential debate we will have to conduct and conclude in our ECB strategy review.  Thank you for your attention. Références  iI would particularly like to thank Nathalie Aufauvre, Matthieu Bussière, Olivier Garnier, Ivan Odonnat and Adrian Penalver for their help in preparing this speech. ii https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pr/date/2020/html/ecb.pr200123~3b8d9fc08d.en.html https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/inter/date/2020/html/ecb.in200124_1~a226a06d7a.en.html iii Article 3.3 of the Treaty on the European Union. iv Article 127.5 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union. v https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/powell20200827a.htm vi at the Evangelische Akademie Tutzing, Bavaria, 13 November 2010. vii https://www.banque-france.fr/sites/default/files/medias/documents/2020.05.25_sep_en_cl.pdf viii https://www.banque-france.fr/sites/default/files/medias/documents/bdf-pse_2019_09_20_vf_cl.pdf ix https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2020/html/ecb.sp200227_1~5eac0ce39a.en.html x https://www.bankofcanada.ca/2020/08/imperative-for-public-engagement/                                                              
Ignazio Visco: The Italian economy and banks – implications of thepandemic and outlookSpeech by Mr Ignazio Visco, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the Italian Banking AssociationExecutive Committee Meeting, Rome, 16 September 2020.*   *   *The current situation and the economic policy responseThe repercussions of the acute global crisis sparked by the spread of COVID-19 are still verydifficult to evaluate. The significance of this event, which is without precedent in recent history, isapparent in the toll it continues to take on human life, social interactions, and the economy.Uncertainty about the outlook impacts negatively on the spending decisions of households andfirms. Notwithstanding the recent, fragile, trend towards improvement, confidence remains verylow both in Italy and abroad.In the early months of this year, higher saving rates in Italy reflected difficulties in procuring goodsand services following the suspension of non-essential activities, while the supply of manyproducts was limited; from the second quarter onwards, saving was mostly driven byprecautionary motives. In the first two quarters, the steep decline in consumption, investmentand foreign demand determined a cumulative drop of more than 17 per cent of GDP, pushinggrowth back to the levels of the early 1990s. As was expected, this appears to have beenfollowed by a significant recovery in production.Overall, also thanks to the monetary and fiscal measures to stimulate demand, this quarter’simprovement in economic activity could be slightly stronger than the baseline scenario outlined inour July projections. For now, the trends we are seeing remain broadly consistent with the resultfor the year envisaged in that scenario: a drop of just under 10 per cent in GDP followed by a verygradual recovery.Considerable risks continue to weigh on the prospects for growth, requiring clarity on thedirection of policies, also over the medium term. The evolution of the pandemic at global level isnot as many had hoped. If protracted, high precautionary savings, which are also widespread inother advanced economies, can hold back the global recovery in the coming months and riskbecoming rooted in the behaviour of households and firms. Our surveys show that so far thepropensity to cut back on discretionary expenses, such as on travel, vacations, restaurants,cinema and theatre, concerns not only the least well- off households, but also a large share ofthose that have not suffered any significant lossof income and do not expect to do so in the future either. Another source of uncertainty atinternational level concerns the ability of borrowers, and of firms especially, to resume regularpayments once the measures introduced to support them in many countries have beendiscontinued. This underscores the need for structural interventions to support the recovery ofthe global economy and the solidity of firms with growth potential.Notwithstanding the gradual recovery from the lows recorded in March, in the first half ofSeptember short-term inflation expectations in the euro area implied by financial asset priceswere barely positive; long-term expectations were just above 1 per cent. It is necessary,therefore, to continue to ensure the effective transmission of monetary policy in all the euro-areacountries, combating the risk that the current weak inflation trends push up debts in real termsand impair, including through this channel, the ability of borrowers to honour them.Last week the Governing Council of the ECB confirmed that the monetary policy stance willcontinue to be highly accommodative for a prolonged period of time and that it stands ready to 1 / 8BIS central bankers' speeches
adjust all of its measures, as appropriate, to fulfil its mandate. Monetary accommodation pursuesthe objective of a progressive return to growth in prices of below, but close to, 2 per cent. To thisend, any factor that could hinder this process must be assessed, taking account of, andcombating, all possible downward pressures: those following worse-than-expected trends indemand for goods and services and in employment, as well as those due to changes in inflationexpectations or exchange rate developments.Fiscal policy support at both national and European level remains vital. The measures in supportof households and firms will continue to be crucial for alleviating liquidity problems, supportingaggregate demand, mitigating social hardship and combating rising inequalities. To reduceuncertainty and to lay the foundations for stable and sustained growth of economic activity andemployment, the solutions to address the public health emergency and the necessarymacroeconomic stabilizers must go hand in hand with resolute interventions on infrastructure,both tangible and intangible. Europe’s decision to institute a fund to ensure the well-being of thenew generations marks a historic step forward: the resources of the Next Generation EUprogramme can, and must, help transform the economic and social climate, promote the birthand growth of firms that in turn can help respond effectively to the challenges posed by newmodels of consumption, social interaction, and the reorganization of production. All countriesmust identify paths of reform to raise the potential for growth, guaranteeing the equity andsustainability, in the financial sphere but not only, of economic development.To this end, Italy must look to those projects that the substantial resources unlocked by theEuropean programmes make possible, not from the perspective of an ordinary budget law, butfocusing instead on interventions that can ensure we recoup the structural lags that have mostimpeded, and continue to impede, the resumption   of growth and creation of skilled and stablejob opportunities. If we do this, the entire production system could respond in kind; considerationmust also be given to how financial intermediation can support the efforts of households andfirms. I would now like to offer some brief reflections on this.The role of the banks during and after the pandemicBanks have responded to the liquidity crisis that the pandemic unleashed on Italian businesses.Bank lending increased significantly to reach sectors and firms of all sizes, including the smallestones. From the beginning of March to the end of July, loans to firms grew by €47 billion, whereasthey had fallen by about €2 billion in the same period in 2019.As in other European economies, liquidity has been bolstered by comprehensive governmentmeasures, including debt moratoriums and loan guarantees. These have supplemented themonetary policy measures adopted by the ECB Governing Council, including the application ofmore favourable conditions to the third series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations(TLTRO III).The debt moratoriums measure was timely, extensive, and efficiently implemented. At the start ofSeptember, applications from households, including those via the ’Gasparrini Fund’ and othersagreed by banks on their own initiative, related to total financing of€300 billion (while there were more than 2.7 million applications). Applications from small andmedium-sized enterprises (SMEs) under the ‘Cure Italy’ decree (almost 1.3 million), were relatedto loans and credit lines for a value of almost €160 billion.As I have already pointed out, the disbursement of loans guaranteed by the State was initiallyslowed by the exceptional volume of applications from firms of all sizes,    as well as by thenumerous changes made to the guarantee schemes. Subsequently, procedures and processingtimes gradually normalized, also thanks to the liaison work of the task force in which the Bank ofItaly participates, coordinated by the Ministry of Economy and Finance. The uptake of theseinstruments today seems exceptionally high. From mid-March to 8 September, the Central 2 / 8BIS central bankers' speeches
Guarantee Fund received more than a million applications from banks for guarantees on loans tofirms, mostly SMEs, for an overall total of almost €80 billion. In addition, SACE guaranteed afurther €13 billion of loans to larger firms.Up to now, the expansion of lending has been backed by public guarantees. Given the structureof our economy, which is predominantly made up of small and medium-sized enterprises, whengrowth starts to gather strength banks will have to meet new requests for financing that will nolonger be supported by such guarantees. A broadly positive response can be expected: atightening of credit would end up creating problems for banks’ own balance sheets, hamperingthe necessary strengthening. The risks of an increase in bad loans and ‘unlikely-to-pay’ positionsposed by this extremely serious recessionary phase will have to be countered with sufficientfinancial resources.A generalized increase in requests to enforce the guarantees could also have repercussions forthe public finances. These can only be absorbed if there is a sustained economic recovery,fostered by bank loans as well as by the necessary, progressive, return to prudent budgetarypolicies. To prevent the uncertainty surrounding firms’ ability to honour their debts from affectingcredit supply conditions and holding down growth, the capital-strengthening measures that havealready been introduced must, where possible, be made rapidly operational.In the first six months of the year, the CET1 ratio increased by almost 1 percentage point, to 14.8per cent. This was due to the capitalization of undistributed profits from the 2019 financial year, inline with the supervisory authorities’ recommendations, and to the measures adopted by the EUto anticipate the entry into force of more favourable risk-weighting for certain asset classes andto mitigate the prudential impact of the new accounting principles (IFRS 9). Banks’ profitabilityhas gone down sharply nevertheless. Although the drop in operating costs, partly linked to themonths of lockdown and    the slowing of productive activities, has more than compensated forthe fall in income, value adjustments on loans have increased sharply. Their growth is almostentirely due to the need to increase the level of coverage of positions that are still performing, butwhose creditworthiness has inevitably deteriorated following the worsening of themacroeconomic outlook.Non-performing loans have continued to decrease until now: between last December and Junethis year, net of loan loss provisions, they fell from 3.3 to 3.1 per cent of total loans (and from 6.6to 6.1 per cent gross of provisions). The ratio of new NPLs to total performing loans hasremained stable, at 1.3 per cent. The trend has, however, benefited from the effects of thegovernment support measures for firms and households, both directly (debt moratoriums andguarantees) and indirectly  (subsidies,  contributions and wage supplementation). The loan lossprovisions reflected the indications of the supervisory authorities regarding more flexibleclassification of loans covered by public guarantees and a more gradual provisioning of baddebts.Still, banks must use this flexibility with care; they should not simply postpone losses that arehighly likely to occur in the future. The available evidence indicates that the increase in loan lossprovisions recorded in the first half of this year is concentrated among larger banks, in the face ofdifficulties that instead appear to be widespread. All banks must adopt instruments for the timelyidentification of an increase in borrowers’ vulnerability, in particular those who have made use ofthe moratoriums and for whom there is possibly little information available at the moment.Despite the weak cyclical conditions, it is important for banks to continue to preserve adequatelevels of capitalization. In this regard, to absorb loan losses, it will likely be necessary to use atleast part of any capital in excess of the minimum requirements. The reduction of the solvencyratios must be countered by initiatives to contain costs and increase income; a contribution maycome from the disposal of relatively low-earning assets that are marginal with respect to banks’core business. 3 / 8BIS central bankers' speeches
In the years to come, it will therefore be fundamental to continue managing   NPLs effectively sothat they do not build up in the balance sheets, hindering efforts    to strengthen capital andundermining market and consumer confidence. Significant progress has been made to date:granular and standardized bad debt data has been collected; specific organizational unitsdedicated to debt recovery have been set up; debt reduction plans have been drawn up; and amarket dealing in this type of assets has been launched. Despite the crisis, in the first eightmonths of this year, Italian banks succeeded in selling an amount of NPLs that was only slightlysmaller than what had been planned before the outbreak of the pandemic. Considering theoperations that are being finalized,it is reasonable to expect that the objectives the banks set themselves at the start of the year willbe achieved in full. We must now rise to the challenge of proceeding along these lines, ensuringfull support to the economy while maintaining capital adequacy.We need to continue to reduce NPLs by building on our past experience, including byrestructuring those exposures classified as ‘unlikely-to-pay’ in order to increase the likelihood oftheir becoming performing loans again. This is all the more necessary for the banks that are notyet fully aligned with industry best practices. As we have noted on several occasions, it isimportant for actions by banks to go hand in hand with interventions to swiftly raise the efficiencyof the civil justice system to the level of the other advanced economies. A more rapid reduction ofstaff shortages and a decisive increase in investment in technology in the judiciary, which areneeded in any case, could make an important contribution. Making court procedures shorterwould also considerably reduce the impact on Italian banks of the rules on provisioning derivingfrom European legislation and from the albeit flexible expectations of the supervisory authorities.The regulatory reforms introduced after the global financial crisis and the supervisory actioncarried out in the last decade (especially following the sovereign debt crisis), have had animportant impact not only on banks’ capital strengthening but also on the volume of NPLs. As aresult, the resilience of Italian banks in the face of adverse shocks has greatly improved. Thescale of the current crisis could nevertheless require extraordinary interventions.In this context, the debate at European level is starting up again about initiatives to set up orimprove the functioning of intermediaries specialized in managing NPLs, the so-called ‘badbanks’ (asset management companies, AMCs). Solutions that also include the possibility ofprivate investors participating in the capital of these companies should be looked on favourably.One possibility is the introduction of a harmonized scheme enabling individual States to worktogether with domestic companies without being subject to some of the current rules, forexample by not having to automatically activate burden-sharing if loans are sold at their ‘trueeconomic value’ and the AMC has sufficient prospects of making a profit. In Italy AMCO(previously SGA), owned by the Ministry of Economy and Finance, operates, albeit by closelyinteracting with the European Commission, as a de facto AMC, carrying out a very important rolein managing this problem in our country.Crisis managementSupervisory actions and interventions aim at ensuring that intermediaries are able to operate onthe market by responding effectively to loan requests in a context of  safe and soundmanagement. In some cases, however, exiting from the market becomes inevitable. We haveoften recalled that banks are businesses and that they can fail; careful and assiduoussupervision can reduce the frequency of crises, but it cannot eliminate them. In such cases, thesupervisory and resolution authorities act to minimize the direct consequences and to preventthe failure of one intermediary from posing serious risks to financial stability and the economy.In the seven years following the global financial crisis, over 500 banks failed in the United States.There were many failures in Europe too. In Italy, liquidation procedures have involved fewer than 4 / 8BIS central bankers' speeches
30 banks and banking groups since 2010, most of which were those intermediaries hardest hitby the double-dip recession that struck the Italian economy.The banking system’s role in crisis management, through deposit guarantee schemes, has beenfundamental; it has contributed significantly to minimizing the repercussions for bank customersand bondholders, and to preserving financial stability. Considerable resources have been madeavailable by intermediaries. In some cases public support has been necessary; it may be neededagain in the near future, given the uncertainty over the economic outlook and the situation ofsome intermediaries which, while generally small, are not negligible when considered as awhole.A measure envisaging the possibility of using public resources to make the liquidation proceduresmoother for banks with total assets of under €5 billion is currently being approved by theEuropean Commission. It would be beneficial not  only that the Commission reaches a positiveconclusion very soon, but also that the measure is extended to 2021 and that it receives morefunding, as it currently only has an envelope of €100 million in the public budget.In Europe, the issue of the orderly management of crises at small and medium- sizedintermediaries, when there is no public interest in starting a resolution procedure (in itselfproblematic, given how difficult it would be for these intermediaries to build  up the requiredbuffers), remains unresolved. It is not a question of asking for public bail-outs of banks thatshould not remain on the market, but rather of facilitating their orderly exit as far as possible,thereby minimizing the impact on customers and on the economy. The institutions must moverapidly on this front too; we stand ready to make our contribution.I would also recall that the Banking Union has yet to be completed, including the creation of abackstop to the Single Resolution Fund as part of the crisis management framework. Accordingto the reform proposal drafted last year that is still under discussion, the European StabilityMechanism should play this role.The experience garnered in the field of crisis management in jurisdictions such    as the UnitedStates appears useful. A comparison with the US regulatory framework, and especially with themodus operandi of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, suggests a series of possibleinterventions that could reduce  the  fragmented  and rigid nature of the European approach.Such interventions are closely linked to the regulation and use of the deposit guarantee scheme,as part of the construction of the ‘third pillar’ of the Banking Union. Among the measures movingin this direction are those designed to promote less dispersion of functions among institutions,the gradual convergence of national liquidation procedures, and the adoption of the ‘least cost’principle as a criterion for guiding choices on how to intervene and as a condition for makingnational procedures more uniform.Challenges and opportunitiesThe challenges arising from the crisis caused by the pandemic join those that the banks werealready addressing. In the near future, it will be necessary to satisfy the greater capitalrequirements connected with the adoption of new rules and the phasing in of those alreadydecided (the latest reforms agreed upon by the Basel Committee; the steady deduction fromcapital of the loan loss provisions made during the initial adoption of IFRS 9; the minimumrequirement for own funds and other liabilities, MREL; and the Single Supervisory Mechanism’srevision of the internal models). These measures have been partly postponed or spread out overtime to avoid procyclical effects during the current phase, but advance preparation is  in any caserequired; in the long term, the capacity of intermediaries to withstand adverse shocks andcontribute to strengthening the economy will depend on them.Banks must continue to recoup levels of profitability that allow them to operate on the marketsuccessfully. The low interest rates that will prevail for a long time to come, the obsolete physical 5 / 8BIS central bankers' speeches
distribution networks, the upgrading of IT structures and increased competition on the part of newoperators and large technological firms will continue to exert great pressure on banks’profitability, which the recent pandemic has done nothing to alleviate. The growth of FinTechenables banks and non-banking intermediaries alike  to respond to customers’ requestssuccessfully and to their mutual benefit. Of course, this comes with risks that intermediariesmust deal with, not only in terms of IT security, also by interacting with the Bank of Italy.In order to seize these opportunities, competences and investments are needed  that may not bewithin the reach of all banks. The challenge is particularly arduous for those (often, but not only,small banks) that were already weak before the onset of the crisis or that have only recentlybegun to recover following serious difficulties, a process that is inevitably made more complex bythe current economic situation. Investment in technology plays a key role, as it makes it possibleto manage risks more effectively, to optimize production processes and to provide new services.It is also fundamental in reducing costs and ensuring that work is organized more efficiently.Preliminary data show, for example, how a non-negligible share of the fall in operating costs recorded  in the first half of the year is attributable to the reduction in property maintenance andworkers’ commute costs; a sensible, though of course not exclusive, use of smart working andof remote communications could make some of these savings structural.In their action, the supervisory authorities do not discriminate between banks based on size, legalform, specialization, or business model; they are not ‘prejudiced’ against specific categories ofsupervised entities. Their goals in terms of strengthening the system can be achieved in variousways. Ad hoc studies show, for example, that there is no one business model for making banksmore profitable and solid; what counts, instead, is that they are sustainable and their corporatestructure is appropriate. The Bank of Italy does not want all banks to conform to the prevailingmodel; on the contrary, it believes that preserving ‘biodiversity’ tends to foster the resilience of thesystem.The aggregation of banks is not a goal  in itself. However,  if carried  out based  on a solidbusiness plan, together with the establishment of consortia and agreements,they are one of the few tools available to banks to enhance efficiency and to make it possible tooperate successfully on the market. As we have noted on several occasions, for manyintermediaries, a combination of size constraints and specialization often hinder their ability tomake the necessary investment in technology, to innovate their products and processes, and toharness economies of scale and of scope. Economies  of scale are especially significant up to acertain size threshold; in recent years, their importance has grown following regulatory reforms,which have raised compliance costs, and technological progress, which has obliged banks tomake significant investment, including in IT security.The reform of the cooperative credit sector aims to combine the opportunities stemming fromgreater size with the necessity of supporting the local economy, to reconcile the cooperativecredit model with the need for sufficient capital levels and to operate in conditions of adequateprofitability so as to remain on the market. To be sure, some aspects still need to be clarified withrespect to the operation and conduct of supervisory checks and the resolvability of cooperativebanking groups, owing to the specificity of their structure and business model. These topics arebeing examined by the cooperative banks themselves and by the competent authorities.The comprehensive assessment of the two new cooperative groups, which has begun recently,is a crucial part of this process. It will complete the reform and provide strong impetus for thesegroups to bolster integration of the various components, improve risk management processes,and make corporate governance more effective. Also drawing on this experience, the systemcomposed of the remaining less significant institutions, particularly the small popolari banks (ofwhich about half are now being given priority by the Bank of Italy’s supervisory function) must findinternal solutions for their preservation and renewal. 6 / 8BIS central bankers' speeches
In this respect, it is difficult to agree with positions which, instead of pushing for a strengtheningof intermediaries’ institutions, organization and capital, limit themselves to extolling the virtues ofthe model based on small local banks, disregarding the fact that its sustainability is todayjeopardized by the economic transformations under way, and not by the will of regulators orsupervisors. Similar considerations apply to those larger banks that have not withstood thedifficulties brought about the crisis, or have overcome them only thanks to the help of the rest ofthe banking system or, within the limits imposed by the rules introduced in Europe, the publicsector.Good corporate governance, regardless of bank size, is a crucial precondition for dealingeffectively and resolutely with the challenges that I have discussed. We have on many occasionshighlighted the negative effects of weaknesses in the governance structure: little debate withinboards of directors and a lack of effective checks and balances for top management; insufficientexperience and professionalism; conflicts of interest; shortcomings in planning mechanisms,which translate into delays and a short- sighted approach to strategic decision-making; andweaknesses in the internal control structure, in the absence of adequate resources and skills.The regulations attach a central role to the composition and quality of the collegial bodies incharge of management and control and assign clear responsibilities to thesupervisory authorities. The effectiveness of the requirements for serving on banks’ topmanagement must be measured against the objective of ensuring that the skills are diversifiedand consistent with the banks’ size, complexity, field of activity and risk profile, in a context thatcalls for specialized and multidisciplinary knowledge, absolute integrity and rectitude, fullindependence of judgment, and sufficient time for the fulfilment of mandates.The adoption of more detailed and stringent criteria for selecting company officials   is of primaryinterest to banks and their shareholders, especially those who do not dispose of sufficientlyeffective tools to monitor the conduct of top management. The quality of bank governance is oneof the supervisory authority’s priorities for this year, and has been the focus of ad hoc studiesthat will continue into the future. The forthcoming entry into force of the new requirementstherefore represents an opportunity to strengthen corporate governance, the sound and prudentmanagement of banks and their competitiveness, in compliance with the general principles of ourlegal system and of national specificities. The margins for intervention on the part of thesupervisory authorities will be expanded thanks to the broader set of conditions to be consideredwhen assessing whether corporate officials are fit to serve.Stronger balance sheets, adequate profitability and good corporate governance are necessarynot only for the stability of the individual banks and of the system as a whole. They are needed toprotect the savings of depositors and of those who have invested in bank bonds and stocks, aswell as to safeguard those accessing credit. They are, therefore, a prerequisite to meet,effectively and transparently, the financial needs of the households and firms that turn to banks,as well as to pursue an efficient allocation of resources. All of this is needed more than evertoday, not only to respond to the impact of the pandemic, but above all to support our economy’sexit from the stagnation in which it has long been mired.A discussion has also begun, in recent days, about the possibility of the State intervening in thebanking system by acquiring direct ownership of those intermediaries that are trying to completedifficult restructuring and recovery processes, with a view to creating a ‘public- sector bankinghub’ that can help support the real economy, especially in the South and for small firms. This is acomplex question. One may debate about the link between the type of ownership and the resultsit can achieve when running a company, but past experience of public-sector bank managementhas not infrequently revealed serious inefficiencies in the resource allocation processes.Nor must it be forgotten that the Italian economy would benefit not so much from the support of alarge state-owned bank, but first and foremost from an efficient public administration, adequate 7 / 8BIS central bankers' speeches
infrastructure, and investment in innovation and knowledge. In any case, it is especially importantto ensure that commercial banks operate as best they can from an organizational andmanagerial point of view, responding effectively and transparently to firms’ and households’demand for credit and the allocation of savings. The nature of public- sector development banksis different and, perhaps, more complex. The benefit of moving in this direction and the ways ofdoing so should be weighed carefully.*   *   *Banks’ conditions and their ability to provide loans and financial services are inevitably affectedby the performance of the economy. Also for this reason, it is important that action intended topromote a return to a path of steady, balanced and lasting growth accompany, as soon aspossible, the emergency measures taken to limit the consequences of the crisis brought aboutby the pandemic.From this standpoint, the Next Generation EU programme is an important opportunity that mustnot be missed. The benefits that Italy will be able to derive from it will depend on its capacity tosubmit measures that are targeted and consistent with the objectives and requirements of theprogramme and to implement them rapidly and without inefficiencies. This will also create theconditions for achieving a gradual and continued rebalancing of the public accounts, therebyavoiding a situation in which Italy’s higher indebtedness ends up exacerbating the country’sproblems instead of alleviating them.For their part, banks must continue with renewed vigour in their institutional, organizational andcapital strengthening. This is an essential condition for successfully meeting the challengesposed by the changes that have taken place in the markets, in technology and in regulation, andfor tackling the gaps that have accumulated over the years, which have been exacerbated by therepercussions of the crisis triggered by the pandemic. 8 / 8BIS central bankers' speeches
 1  BANKOFGHANAEST.1957    AFI-BOG WEBINAR ON INTEGRATING GENDER CONSIDERATIONS INTO COVID-19 POLICY SOLUTIONS     CLOSING REMARKS BY  ELSIE ADDO AWADZI SECOND DEPUTY GOVERNOR, BANK OF GHANA       14TH SEPTEMBER 2020  
 2   Fellow Governors and Deputy Governors of the AFI Network AFI Executive Director Dr. Alfred Hannig, and AFI Management and Staff  Members of the AFI Network  Invited guests  Ladies and Gentlemen,   I have the honour of delivering the closing remarks for what has been a most remarkable and insightful webinar. I believe this webinar has done what it sought to do, by providing a platform for sharing experiences and lessons learnt in the pandemic response so far and helping to chart a way forward towards more gender-inclusive measures to spur economic recovery efforts.   At the beginning of this webinar, we heard remarks from Governor Ernest Addison and Dr. Hannig that were thought-provoking, and which laid a perfect foundation for the stimulating discussions that ensued. The plenary sessions and breakout group discussions effectively addressed issues pertaining to the five key pillars of (i) Women, Regulation, and Regulatory Institutions; (ii) Women’s Participation in Business and in the Job Market; 
 3  (iii) Women and Social Protection; (iv) Women and Access to Financial Services including DFS; and (iv) Women and Consumer Protection.  The experiences that have been shared through today’s discussions confirm that the pandemic has disproportionately affected women, pushing them out of both formal and informal employment and business, and in some cases from the financial system, further widening the gender gap in access to finance. In many countries, COVID-related restrictions came at a higher price for women than for men, given that more women tend to be involved in informal, temporary, or part-time work, or in informal business partly due to the domestic responsibilities they disproportionately shoulder. What is more, the pre-existing gender gap in access to finance has meant that many women adversely impacted by the pandemic have little or no savings to cushion them and have no access to credit or grants to save their businesses from collapse.   Indeed, this phenomenon is not limited to the developing world. Advanced economies are also grappling with the distributional consequences of the pandemic. For example, in a recent Working Paper, the IMF found evidence that women in Japan were more negatively impacted by the pandemic due to disparities in the labour market and the fact that more women than men had to drop out of the job market to take care of their children amidst 
 4  massive disruptions to childcare and schools. The IMF advocates for policies to promote better work-life balance and gender equality to help enhance female employment opportunities and women’s economic empowerment in the “new normal” after the pandemic is under control.   In the case of emerging and developing economies, these disproportionate impacts on women are bound to be worse, given the weak social protections that exist. Our discussions today have also revealed that with the exception of a few countries in the AFI Network, many policy and regulatory responses to the pandemic have not considered gender-specific dynamics of the economic fallout from the pandemic, and in that respect may not have helped to avoid a widening of the gender gap in access to finance.   How do we then move forward from here to address the widening gender gap in access to finance? The pandemic may have unleashed unprecedented hardship on vulnerable groups such as women (particularly those operating in the informal and MSME sectors), but there are opportunities to rebuild our economies, and while at it, to rebuild them in a manner that leads to more inclusion and resilience.  
 5  Please permit me at this point, to share some of my own thoughts as to how we could make progress.  Promoting gender-inclusive finance is somehow inextricably linked to addressing the many underlying socio-economic and cultural issues that create inequalities for women in the job market and in business (formal or informal). Policies are needed to empower women economically by addressing issues affecting work-life balance, employment and income disparities, land ownership, inheritance, education, healthcare, child care, and elder care, among others. Greater access to finance for women., necessarily depends on this.    What changes are required in the design of financial services and products (traditional and digital) and the design of policies and regulation to correct the additional disparities created by recent COVID-19 responses? For example, existing literature shows that women traditionally tend to pay their loans on time. How is this pandemic changing that narrative and what might be the implications for women’s access to credit going forward? How can financial institutions better support their female clients to help avoid losing access to future credit?   How can we improve the quality of financial intermediation to address the gender-inclusive finance barriers caused by the COVID-19 
 6  pandemic, while not compromising the stability and integrity of our financial systems?    How do we galvanise the needed support and mobilise the necessary resources (technical capacity, peer-to-peer learning, guidance for stakeholder dialogue, and other support) for the redesign of social safety nets and financial (and digital) literacy programmes to better align with gender-inclusive finance? How can we effectively engage relevant policymakers, legislators, and civil society to advocate for policies that ultimately promote more gender-inclusive finance?  In sum, the gender-inclusive finance agenda is now more critical than ever before, and a coordinated effort is required to accelerate action going forward. Making real progress will require bold action to address the underlying pre-existing vulnerabilities that have only been exacerbated by the current pandemic., so that we rebuild a more inclusive, sustainable, and resilient future. I trust that members of the AFI Network, with the continued support of AFI, will, going forward, work assiduously on removing these underlying barriers to help address the widening gender gap in access to finance. I invite us all to renew our respective Maya, Denarau, and Kigali commitments, and to make a big push for tangible progress in gender-inclusive finance. 
 7  I note that AFI intends to develop a policy summary note from this webinar building on the just published COVID-19 GIF Policy paper, which will be shared with AFI members. This will be very helpful for guiding members’ efforts going forward, as we work towards inclusive, sustainable, and resilient economic recovery in our various jurisdictions.  On behalf of Governor Ernest Addison, I thank AFI for agreeing to co-host this very important webinar with the Bank of Ghana.  I thank the hard-working team at the AFI Management Unit, the moderators, panelists, participants, and all who contributed in diverse ways to make this webinar the big success that it has been.   Let us all continue to work together to bridge the gap in access to finance for all.   I thank you for your kind attention.   
  Appearance before the Ecological Transition and Demographic Challenge Committee Congress of Deputies Margarita Delgado Deputy Governor       10.09.2020  
     1Members of Parliament, thank you very much for your kind invitation. I am delighted to be here today to discuss a topical issue that, I believe, is very important in the context of finalising the draft Climate Change and Energy Transition bill. I would like to begin by reflecting on the role that public policies can play in managing the transition. I will then go on to talk about the role that the banking sector can and must play in this process, including business, regulatory and supervisory matters. I will also address one of the key outstanding issues: the lack of reliable and uniform information, which hampers decisions on investment, supervision and control.  The banking sector’s involvement in the transition to a more sustainable economic model is a relatively recent development. However, as you are well aware, combating climate change is a recurring objective of international institutions, since at least the United Nations Summit held in Rio de Janeiro in 1992.  I think it is fair to say that the European Union has, for some time, spearheaded this fight internationally.  Europe has decided to act without further delay, before it is too late. Nevertheless, we need to be aware that taking early action can increase the social costs associated with the process to transform the economy.  Admittedly, the transition will have costs and, as reflected in the law itself, these may have undesired economic and social consequences. However, it should be highlighted that the costs will always be less than those that would arise if the scenarios envisaged were to materialise.  Although this transition will no doubt open up opportunities, those sectors and groups that will potentially be more affected by this series of decisions have to be identified, and measures must be implemented to mitigate the net adverse effects that this transition to a more sustainable economy will have on them.  It is worth bearing in mind that, though climate change is a global affair, both in terms of its causes and of its consequences, there will be cross-country differences in the effect of a rise in average temperatures.  According to scientific studies, Spain is one of the European countries that will potentially be most affected by climate change. In other words, it is among the countries where the aggregate impact will be most acute and, further, it will have less adaptability to this change. That said, Spain has advantages as regards the use of renewable energies (for instance in terms of average sunlight hours) and it is clear that both our current account balance and our energy dependence situation would improve substantially by achieving full decarbonisation.  The draft Climate Change and Energy Transition bill reflects all these circumstances and difficulties, and it must set out an ambitious but realistic path, in line with the international and European commitments that we as a country have assumed.  Naturally, it is yourselves, members of Parliament, as custodians of the public's will, who have the legitimacy needed to set the rules marking out this transformation process, which will doubtless be complex and challenging.  
     2Before focusing on the main topic of my appearance, allow me to provide a few brief considerations on the suitability of the tools available to us for reaching the emissions reduction targets. As I have already mentioned, the banking sector has an important role to play in this process; however, public policies, most notably fiscal policy, can and must play a preeminent role in managing the transition to a more sustainable economy.  From the economic theory standpoint, the origin of the problems associated with climate change is a paradigmatic case of negative externality that needs to be “internalised”, as the social costs (in this case, environmental costs) of pollution are not being taken into account by economic agents when pursuing their activity.  When faced with this type of market failure, taxation can be used to ensure that the pollution intensity of productive activities equates the marginal costs, thereby reducing emissions to the socially optimal level.  Further, mention should be made of the EU Emissions Trading System, which is currently being reviewed to bring carbon prices closer to levels consistent with the Paris Agreement. Logically, this objective can be achieved in other ways, such as by promoting technological change that reduces the most pollutant emissions. And, indeed, consumers also have a prominent voice in this process, as a change in their preferences in favour of a certain type of product can also alter relative prices. International coordination of all of these policies is key. Decisions on some of them, such as taxes and subsidies, can be taken at different levels (national, regional or local), whereas technological aspects and agents’ preferences are far more global, and we cannot disentangle ourselves from them.  Naturally, in a global world, there is always a risk of certain jurisdictions applying more lax environmental standards than European ones. To prevent distortions in trade and the economy, it is necessary to put in place adjustment mechanisms, negotiated through the World Trade Organisation. Returning to the role of the financial sector, I would like to point out that, until relatively recently, climate risk was given very limited consideration by a small number of banks, chiefly within their social responsibility areas.  Allow me to admit that, as it was an area considered beyond our remit, neither was it assessed by central banks.  Nevertheless, since the signing of the Paris Agreement in 2015, the role finance can play in the transition process is becoming more visible and climbing up the agenda of international financial organisations. Notable are the various initiatives within the framework of the United Nations, the OECD, the Financial Stability Board and the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, among others, and the sustainable finance work by the European Commission.  Specifically, in the central banking and banking supervision environment, I would mention the work by the Network for Greening the Financial Sector (NGFS). This network was created in late 2017 with the aim of analysing, defining and promoting best practices that contribute to the proper management of climate risk in the financial sector. The Banco de España actively participates in the work of this network, which has grown exponentially and now has around 70 members and 13 observers.  
     3Naturally, it is worth considering how banks can contribute to this collective challenge; ultimately, when we think about climate change we see pollutant, industrial activities, which clearly do not include banking. The transition law itself has just two articles directly affecting the financial sector.  However, despite being a ‘low-emissions’ sector, banks have a major role to play in achieving this transition.  First, it is clear that a change of productive model affecting economic agents will also have direct consequences for banks. Therefore, it should come as no surprise that as supervisors we require that banks appropriately measure the risks derived from this transition process.  From a theoretical standpoint, the ecological transition process entails two types of risk:  (i) physical risks, caused by the direct effects of climate change as a result of the increase in temperature or more frequent or more severe storms, flooding or natural disasters,  (ii) transition risks, which refer to the potential effect on specific borrowers of regulatory measures, technological changes, and changes in customer behaviour and preferences.  The two types of risk are clearly related and interdependent: the more ambitious the regulations, the greater the transition risk and the lower the physical risk, and vice versa. However, if we wait too long, not acting could also lead to both risks being high, i.e. if abrupt, late corrective action is taken when the physical risks are already difficult to avoid. The measurement of these risks undoubtedly poses significant challenges. There are methodological difficulties, such as the long time horizon in which the effects of physical risk are observed, which far exceeds those used to measure conventional banking risks.  Measuring transition risk also presents problems: understanding how it will arise is not straightforward; there is a lack of information allowing an assessment of the firms that could be most adversely affected; and the exact consequences of the different future scenarios are not clear. In any event, it is worth remembering that, unlike other ‘transitions’ prompted by sudden changes in technology or behaviour, the transition to a decarbonised economy has been announced and reported on; as such, it would be hard to claim surprise or a lack of knowledge. Moreover, analysing the business environment is already an essential part of the risk assessment and management that banks must carry out, regardless of whether the origin of such changes is technological, related to customer behaviour, regulatory or environmental. A series of expectations from both the Single Supervisory Mechanism and the Banco de España itself, within the remit of their supervisory competences, on managing and measuring these risks is expected to be published soon.  The implementation of these measures will certainly take some time, but supervisory expectations in the short and medium term would be that banks understand the implications of this risk and are capable of identifying and measuring it, always in a manner proportionate to their size and complexity. The information generated internally should reach the board of 
     4directors, who must be capable of assessing how this risk can impact their business model and incorporate it into their risk appetite framework. An important consequence that I would stress to this Committee is that, by appropriately measuring these risks, the banking sector would become a catalyst for the change of productive model.  If banks identify and quantify climate risks, and pass them through to prices and capital, they become “facilitators” of the transition by channelling funds to those activities that contribute most to the sustainable transformation of the economy. In this regard, an issue that has long been debated internationally is whether or not regulation should contribute to accelerating this transformation process. Indeed, the European Banking Authority is mandated to assess, by 2025, whether this differential prudential treatment for exposures considered “green” would be justified.  The Banco de España considers that financial regulation cannot and should not take the lead in this process, let alone stand in for the potential inaction of other actors which, as I have already mentioned, have much more appropriate instruments for these purposes.  It should be noted that a similar effect would ultimately occur if the measures implemented to foster the transition are sufficiently successful and banks properly factor in the impact of such measures into their risk analyses. Any additional regulatory factors would, as a minimum, entail the “double counting” of risks in capital, which would create perverse incentives and reduce the framework’s sensitivity to risk.  Given the scale of the structural change, it is very important that banks adopt a forward-looking approach, taking into consideration different potential scenarios. The Banco de España, like other supervisors, is developing its own methodology to assess these risks in a forward-looking manner, which will translate into climate change stress tests.  Regardless of other considerations, the implications, challenges and opportunities that the transformation process of our economy presents for banks’ business are obvious. The amount of investment needed to undertake the transition is indeed enormous (the bill estimates around €200 billion over the coming decade), not to mention the additional resources from the European plan approved in July.  Undoubtedly, this is a great opportunity to modernise and transform our economy to a more sustainable model, as set out in the bill. Obviously, the mobilisation of financial resources is a clear incentive for banks to get involved. However, I believe it is also fair to point out that the sector is fully committed to this fight, as attested to by the recent climate commitment, signed on the occasion of the COP25, and the launch of the Centre for Responsible and Sustainable Finance (FinResp by its Spanish abbreviation).  Nevertheless, despite this favourable attitude, I would like to stress that, to continue moving forward, we must address a key challenge: we lack sufficiently consistent and reliable information. In this regard, Sir Ronald Cohen, a well-known philanthropist, investor and environmental activist, recently drew an analogy with the changes in accounting standards.  What we call “generally accepted accounting principles” (GAAP) did not become widespread until 1933, when the US government mandated that companies had to draw up their annual accounts in accordance with these common principles. Prior to the 1929 crash, 
     5each company published information according to its own criteria, preventing a proper understanding, comparison and analysis of financial information. Indeed, despite their limitations and interpretive problems, without common accounting principles, any solvency or risk-discrimination analysis would be lacking in reliability. Similarly, environmental risk cannot be assessed without comparable information. All economic agents, whether they be banks, investors or customers, need to have information to make decisions and, despite the undeniable cost companies will incur to adapt and comply with these additional transparency requirements, I believe that this is a necessary change. In this context, I would like to refer briefly to the development of the green bond market. The history of this product began in 2007, when it was first issued by the European Investment Bank.  As you all know, green bond funds must be earmarked for financing projects that are directly related to sustainability, the preservation of natural resources and the transition to a low-carbon economy.  To receive the "green" certification, the bond must adhere to a set of principles, like the Green Bond Principles (GBP) established by ICMA1 in 2014, and an external assessor must verify its compliance.  I believe it is highly significant that this market has evolved outside official initiatives and is based entirely on private standards, like the GPB, as it shows the growing concern among private investors over the effects of climate change.  However, private standards also face uniformity and consistency problems. The rapid growth of this market has also raised some concern over the possibility that, for image and corporate social responsibility reasons, certain issuers may be attempting to appear they care more about environmental issues than their actions would actually imply, which could cause them future reputational problems.2 Pressure is mounting from credit institutions, investors and customers to increase transparency and information, and European regulations are also advocating resolutely for this.  In this regard, on 15 April, the European Council adopted a Regulation which established an EU-wide classification system, or "taxonomy", with the aim of setting a common language for determining the economic activities that may be considered sustainable from an environmental point of view. The Commission is also consulting on the development of European standards for green bonds. Clearly, we need to understand that this taxonomy, or any other that may be proposed, cannot be perfect from day one. Its fixed nature represents an additional challenge. Ideally, we should be striving for a dynamic concept of taxonomy, which not only takes into account current emissions, but also reflects whether an activity increases or reduces these emissions. In any event, it is clear that, in order to analyse and manage these risks, it is necessary to have standards, even though they may be imperfect.                                                                                               1 International Capital Market Association 2 In the jargon of the field, this type of behaviour is called "greenwashing". 
     6Naturally, the draft Climate Change and Energy Transition bill adds to this trend, requiring entities with securities admitted to trading, credit institutions, insurance and reinsurance companies, and other companies (for reasons of size) to publish an annual assessment of the financial impact on society of the climate change risks generated by their activity, as well as the measures taken to address those risks. The bill stipulates a two-year period to set out these reporting requirements through a royal decree.3 I believe it is important that these enhanced reporting requirements are in line with European developments, such as the ongoing revision of the non-financial reporting directive. Allow me to conclude here for the sake of brevity. I would have liked to refer to the internal work the Banco de España is carrying out to adapt to this new reality, which undoubtedly affects our duties as regulator, micro- and macroprudential supervisor and market investor, and even monetary policy itself (whose strategy is currently being reviewed), but it would have taken too much time. Of course, if any of you are interested, I will be happy to discuss any of these points further. Thank you for your attention. I am at your disposal for any clarification you may require.                                                                                                  3The bill provides, however, that credit institutions will have to publish, from 2023, specific decarbonisation targets for their loan and investment portfolios, in line with the Paris Agreement. 
1    ‘Monetary policy and financial markets in post-COVID-19 South Africa’ Opening remarks by Ms Fundi Tshazibana, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the JP Morgan Emerging Markets Credit Conference,  22 September 2020  1. Introduction  Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for the opportunity to address this edition of the JP Morgan Emerging Markets Credit Conference – the first to be held online. In many aspects, 2020 has certainly been a year of firsts. In recent years, much of the concern about a halt in global growth has stemmed from concerns about the possibility of a recession in the world’s largest economy, concerns that the escalation of trade tensions would result in a large reduction in global trade and investment, as well as concerns about geopolitical developments. But until now, never has there been such widespread concern around a pandemic that would change so many aspects of our daily lives.   The COVID-19 outbreak has had major health, social and economic impacts, which have required sizeable adjustments to policy. Monetary policy, unsurprisingly, has also had to respond to this once-in-a-100-years event. In my comments today, I would like to elucidate how the South African Reserve Bank (SARB) has responded to these exceptional circumstances. Second, I will highlight the policy outlook as we see it. Finally, I will turn to some of the challenges the ‘post-COVID’ world may pose for monetary policymaking, and the role financial markets may play in informing our approach.   
2   2. How the COVID-19 crisis required a strong response  As the COVID-19 pandemic started to spread in Asia, and then Europe, the South African authorities moved quickly to follow international best practice and imposed restrictions on people’s movements and economic activities. These measures helped to ‘flatten the curve’ of infections and allowed the healthcare sector time to make adequate preparations. These measures appear to have paid dividends. While COVID-19 infection rates surged in South Africa in June and July, the rate of new infections appears to be subsiding. The mortality rate remains moderate by global standards, and our healthcare system has been largely responsive to those in need. Experts agree that the human cost would have been higher had the government’s response been delayed.  However, as in other parts of the world, these healthcare gains came at significant economic costs. In April 2020, under the strictest lockdown levels, manufacturing production and retail sales fell by 45% and 49% respectively when compared to a month earlier. Vehicle, accommodation and restaurants sales basically ground to a halt. As Statistics South Africa has since reported, gross domestic product (GDP) for the second quarter fell by an unprecedented 51% (annualised). The SARB’s latest forecast projections now show that annual GDP will fall by 8.2%. This is several times worse than the previous deepest annual contraction, which was -2.1% in 1992.1   While these numbers and other bad news have dominated headlines, it is also important to understand that GDP data arrives with a lag, and that the economy has since begun to recover. As lockdown restrictions were gradually eased from early May, business activity resumed. By July, more than half of the April plunge in output and sales had been reversed. High-frequency mobility and transaction indicators show that this normalisation continued in August, in some cases returning to pre-crisis levels. Globally, many countries are also seeing stronger-than-expected rebounds. Although the recovery path is likely to be a difficult one, the current data are encouraging.                                                            1 The comparison stretches back to 1947. 
3   Part of the explanation for this strong rebound is that fiscal and monetary authorities have provided unprecedented stimulus. Conditions have certainly justified it. Let us recall that at the height of risk aversion, in the fourth week of March, financial conditions in the United States (US) were about six standard deviations in restrictive territory; the South African rand had declined by 17% against the US dollar in a space of five weeks, and the yield on the 10-year government bond had risen by about 280 basis points to as high as 11.7%.    Emergency action by the world’s fiscal and monetary authorities helped stave off a financial crisis. In South Africa, earlier gains in stabilising inflation well within the target range allowed the SARB to join in this massive stimulus effort. The Monetary Policy Committee lowered the repurchase (repo) rate by a cumulative 275 basis points between March and July – one of the largest moves by any emerging market country.  Our response was not limited to policy rate cuts. To facilitate the flow of credit to cash-constrained businesses and individuals, the SARB injected liquidity into money markets through larger and more frequent repo operations; it also temporarily lowered regulatory requirements for banks. In response to signs of illiquidity in the government bond market, the SARB embarked on a programme of asset purchases, a point to which I will return later. Finally, the SARB has assisted the National Treasury in setting up and administering the government’s Loan Guarantee Scheme, which aims to promote bank lending to qualifying businesses.  3. Normalisation process will take time  As indicated earlier, economic activity indicators have been rebounding in recent months. Encouragingly, monthly monetary data show that credit to the private sector has continued to grow in year-on-year terms, indicating that risks of a ‘credit crunch’ have abated. Since peaking in late March, yields on short-dated local-currency bonds have declined by as much as 400 basis points, while those at the longer end have declined by less than 200 basis points – consistent with the steeper shape of the yield curve. Nevertheless, full normalisation of economic activity is likely to be a long-haul effort.   
4   Favourable base effects are likely to result in strong GDP gains in both the third quarter and 2021 as a whole. Thus, the SARB’s Quarterly Projection Model (QPM) forecasts a real GDP gain of 3.9% next year. But in level terms, our model only expects real GDP to gradually converge back towards pre-COVID-19 levels. The QPM therefore points to a large output gap (as high as 6.5% of potential GDP on average in 2020) that will only gradually narrow over the remainder of the forecasting period and remain negative even in 2022.   Because of both the persistence of such economic slack and the better anchoring of inflation expectations, the SARB expects that consumer price inflation will remain within the lower half of the 3−6% target range over the forecasting period, with the exception of a short-lived spike in the second quarter of next year as a low base distorts energy price inflation. Barring the materialisation of upside risks, this benign inflation outlook should allow the SARB to maintain an accommodative stance for most of the coming two years, and only withdraw stimulus in a gradual fashion, as the output gap slowly closes. In our September forecasting exercise, the QPM’s projections are consistent with a rise in the policy rate from the current rate of 3.5% to 4% by the end of 2021 and 5% a year later. The latter would still be 70 basis points below the CPI average of the past decade.   4  Monetary policy challenges in a post-COVID-19 world  However, as the Monetary Policy Committee has highlighted many times in the past, the QPM policy rate forecast only serves as a guideline, since the economic developments on which it is premised are uncertain. Indeed, this uncertainty may turn out to be higher than usual in a post-COVID-19 world. As we contemplate the global and domestic economy beyond the pandemic, I would like to focus on several issues which can affect the conduct of monetary policy in the coming years.  We do not know how the crisis will affect trend productivity and potential economic growth over the medium term, both globally and at a domestic level.   Are we going to experience a further loss of growth momentum, as occurred after the global financial crisis, due to the slow reaction by businesses to structural 
5  changes in demand? Will the rise in public and corporate debt levels crowd out private investment? Or, on the contrary, will the change in the behaviour of economic agents’ spur investments in new high-tech industries raise productivity on a sustained basis? Few economists are willing to express strong views on the topic at present.  However, some are taking the view that trend growth is more likely to be weaker than stronger over the next cycle, projecting in particular a weaker contribution from capital accumulation.2 And this is where the uncertainty I have alluded to can play a negative role. By increasing the likelihood of large losses, uncertainty can discourage businesses from risking capital into supply-enhancing projects; the pandemic’s memory could result in ‘belief scarring’ which could durably undermine confidence in the economy’s ability to again grow strongly, as Professor Veldkamp recently suggested at the Jackson Hole Symposium.3  In turn, lower potential growth – either globally or in South Africa, or both – would have implications for the equilibrium, or neutral real interest rate (NRIR), which is a crucial element of medium-term monetary policy calibration. Traditional economic theory argues that a decline in potential growth implies a decline in the neutral rate.4 Indeed, research over the past decade suggests that in advanced economies at least, lower potential growth has contributed to the secular decline in neutral rates.5  However, the linkages may be more complex for an emerging economy such as South Africa, which has long had a structural current account deficit and hence requires an equilibrium interest rate that attracts foreign as well as domestic savings to finance investment. The SARB’s models link the domestic neutral rate to both its global counterpart and a South African-specific risk premium. The risk, however, is that this risk premium will rise over time as weak growth increases concerns about fiscal sustainability, thus offsetting the benefits from a lower global neutral rate.                                                             2 See ‘Coronavirus’ global effects: growth drivers in a post-virus world’, Global Economics View, Citi, 8 July 2020. 3 See J Kozlowski, L Veldkamp and V Venkateswaran, ‘Scarring body and mind: the long-term belief-scarring effects of COVID-19’, 2 September 2020. 4 The theory was first developed by Knut Wicksell in Interest and prices (1898). 5 See for instance L Rachel and T Smith, ‘Secular drivers of the global real interest rate’, Bank of England Working Paper No. 571, December 2015. 
6  Uncertainties over both potential GDP growth and the neutral rate can also affect the speed at which a central bank normalises its policy stance. As indicated earlier, at present the SARB only sees a slow narrowing of the output gap, which should allow for gradual real rate normalisation. But were the output gap to be less negative than we expect in the latter years of the forecast, or the equilibrium real rate higher, risks of higher inflation might end up under-estimated. At the same time, uncertainties remain as to whether the lower pass-through of foreign exchange movements to inflation will persist in coming years, especially if South Africa’s loss of its investment-grade status results in structurally higher rand exchange rate volatility.  5. Heeding the messages from financial markets  In trying to ascertain potential structural changes to long-term macroeconomic variables, the SARB will, of course, be watching the signs from financial markets. In that respect, our Financial Markets Department continues to monitor market developments, both to detect threats to smooth market functioning and also to understand market expectations of interest rates, inflation and credit risk premia, among other variables. For instance, the SARB has paid close attention to the steepening of the government bond yield curve, which began before the onset of the COVID-19 crisis, and which has persisted even as the March risk aversion abated. Is the steepness of the yield curve – both in absolute terms and relative to emerging market peers – simply a function of credit risk, or is it telling us something about future inflation risk too? Inflation expectations, from surveys or breakeven rates, are in most cases lower than they were historically and generally well within the target range. But we want to be sure that concerns about South Africa’s debt trajectory do not crystallise into higher inflation expectations.   In that respect, I would like to briefly touch on a point that has been strongly debated since the SARB introduced a programme of government bond purchases in March. Should the aim of this programme be limited (as it is now) to ensure proper bond market liquidity? Or should it extend to influencing the shape of the yield curve in order to limit government funding costs and to ensure that lower policy rates fully transmit to broader borrowing costs in the economy? The answer to this question 
7  is not simple, especially as yield curve control policies have become more widespread recently, and therefore less disreputable.   However, there are risks in considering such a strategy in South Africa. First, unlike most advanced economies, South Africa remains far from the effective lower bound on interest rates. Hence, influencing the shape of the yield curve at a time when the SARB can, if needed, cut rates further to achieve its goals could unnecessarily complicate policymaking and policy communication. Second, by interfering with the market’s ‘price discovery’ mechanism, the SARB would reduce its ability to learn from the yield curve’s signalling capacity, which provides messages over longer-term inflation expectations. Losing that signal would also make it harder for policymakers elsewhere to assess the fiscal space. Third, keeping longer-term yields lower than their market ‘equilibrium’ might discourage non-resident investors from resuming purchases of domestic bonds, keeping the rand undervalued and hence adding to future inflation risks.  6. Conclusion  In conclusion, let me again highlight that the SARB’s response to an unprecedented crisis and contraction in economic activity has been strong and quick, in large part due to our earlier hard-won credibility gains on anchoring inflation expectations. As a result of these gains, the SARB was able to prevent this economic contraction from feeding into a credit crunch and financial market meltdown. The stabilisation in the rand’s exchange rate and decline in government bond yields are encouraging signs that investors do not see our policy actions as jeopardising our credibility.   However, as we contemplate an uncertain future with respect to potential growth and other variables, allow me to reiterate some familiar but important points. Monetary policy cannot on its own improve the potential growth rate of the economy or reduce macroeconomic risks. These should be addressed by implementing prudent macroeconomic policies and structural reforms that lower costs generally and increase investment opportunities, potential growth and job creation. Such steps will enhance the effectiveness of monetary policy and its transmission to the broader economy.  
8  Over the medium term, the SARB will need to remain data-dependent in its policy decisions. Indeed, we stand ready to utilise our tools, as appropriate, within our mandate to support the economy and to ensure that financial markets are functional. As financial markets themselves move towards new post-crisis equilibriums, we will continue to monitor developments in asset prices closely and leverage that information in our formulation of monetary policy.  Thank you. 
For release on delivery 12:00 p.m. EDT September 21, 2020     Strengthening the CRA to Meet the Challenges of Our Time  Remarks by  Lael Brainard Member Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System at the Urban Institute    Washington, D.C. (via webcast)      September 21, 2020   
It is a pleasure to be back at the Urban Institute with Sarah Rosen Wartell to discuss the Federal Reserve’s efforts to strengthen the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) regulation.1  Today the Federal Reserve Board unanimously approved an advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR) that would strengthen, clarify, and tailor the CRA regulation to better meet the law’s core purpose.2    The CRA’s History and Purpose in Relation to Today’s Challenges The CRA was one of several landmark civil rights laws to address systemic inequities in credit access.3  The CRA was intended to reinforce the other statutes in addressing redlining, wherein banks declined to make loans or extend other financial services in neighborhoods of largely Black and other minority households, in part based on government maps that literally delimited these neighborhoods in red as high credit risks (figure 1).  By enacting the CRA, lawmakers aimed to reverse the disinvestment associated with years of government policies and market actions that deprived lower-income and predominantly minority areas of credit and investment.   Even with these critical laws, the legacy of discriminatory lending and systemic inequity in credit access remains in evidence today.  The typically minority neighborhoods demarcated in red in the old color-coded maps tend to be characterized by worse economic performance and                                                       1 I am grateful to Taz George of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and Amanda Roberts, Joseph Firschein, and Carrie Johnson of the Federal Reserve Board for their assistance in preparing this text. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. 2 See Federal Reserve Board, “Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking: the Community Reinvestment Act,” (September 21, 2020), https://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/boardmeetings/files/cra-fr-notice-20200921.pdf.   3 The Equal Credit Opportunity Act and the Fair Housing Act are fair lending laws that are designed to combat discrimination on prohibited bases such as race, and the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act is designed to bring transparency to mortgage lending practices.   
- 2 -  opportunity even today.4  Beyond these specific neighborhoods, research and surveys indicate that there are ongoing racial disparities in access to credit.  As of 2019, small businesses with Black ownership were only half as likely as those with White ownership to have obtained bank financing in the previous five years (figure 2).5  In 2016, the “wealth gap [was] roughly the same as in 1962, two years before the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.”  And the gap in homeownership rates between Black and White households remains significant today, even when controlling for differences in income and education.6 Recent events have highlighted and exacerbated these challenges.  When I last joined you at the Urban Institute to discuss the CRA, 7 we did not know the tremendous hardship and heartache the COVID-19 pandemic would cause, especially for groups with thin financial buffers, including many low- and moderate-income (LMI) neighborhoods, Black and Latinx workers, and workers and entrepreneurs affiliated with small businesses.8  In parallel, the tragic                                                       4 See, e.g., Daniel Aaronson, Daniel Hartley, and Bhashkar Mazumder, “The Effects of the 1930s HOLC ‘Redlining’ Map,” Working Paper No. 2017-12 (Chicago: Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, revised August 2020), https://www.chicagofed.org/publications/working-papers/2017/wp2017-12.  5 Specifically, 46 percent of firms with non-Hispanic White ownership have obtained bank funds in the past five years, compared to 23 percent of firms with non-Hispanic Black ownership. See Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Small Business Credit Survey: 2020 Report on Employer Firms (2020), p. 3, https://www.fedsmallbusiness.org/medialibrary/FedSmallBusiness/files/2020/2020-sbcs-employer-firms-report.  6 See Dionissi Aliprantis and Daniel Carroll, “What Is Behind the Persistence of the Racial Wealth Gap?” Economic Commentary, no 2019-03, February 28, 2019, https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and-events/publications/economic-commentary/2019-economic-commentaries/ec-201903-what-is-behind-the-persistence-of-the-racial-wealth-gap.aspx.  See also Jung Hyun Choi, “Breaking Down the Black-White Homeownership Gap,” Urban Wire: Housing and Housing Finance (blog), Urban Institute, February 21, 2020, https://www.urban.org/urban-wire/breaking-down-black-white-homeownership-gap, which finds that the homeownership rate among White households is 30 percentage points higher than for Black households, and a large gap remains after controlling for differences in income levels. 7 See Lael Brainard, “Strengthening the Community Reinvestment Act by Staying True to Its Core Purpose” (speech at the Urban Institute, January 8, 2020), https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/brainard20200108a.htm. 8 The Census Household Pulse Survey indicates that 23 percent of non-Hispanic Black renters and 20 percent of Hispanic renters reported they were not caught up on their rent in August 2020, compared to 11 percent of non-Hispanic White renters. The Federal Reserve Board’s Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking (SHED) indicates that one-fourth of workers in low-income families, with incomes below $40,000, who experienced a layoff said they had returned to work for the same employer by July, compared to 32 percent of middle-income and 39 percent of high-income workers, with incomes of between $40,000 and $100,000, and greater than $100,000, respectively.  See also Federal Reserve System, FedListens: Perspectives from the Public, (Federal Reserve System, June 2020), https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/files/fedlistens-report-20200612.pdf; Claire Kramer Mills 
- 3 -  death of George Floyd has ignited a national discussion about racial injustice and a renewed commitment to take action to address systemic inequity.9  The CRA is a seminal statute that remains as important as ever as the nation confronts challenges associated with racial equity and the COVID-19 pandemic.  We must ensure that the CRA is a strong and effective tool to address ongoing systemic inequities in access to credit and financial services for LMI and minority individuals and communities. By conferring an affirmative obligation on banks to help meet the credit needs in all of the neighborhoods they serve, the CRA prompts banks to be not only more active lenders in LMI areas but also important participants in broader efforts to revitalize communities across the country.  Research shows the CRA has positive effects on access to capital and financial services for communities, including home mortgages, small business loans, and services offered at local bank branches.10  Reforms to the CRA should strengthen the engagement between banks and their communities and advance the law’s core purpose of addressing disinvestment and unequal access to credit.    The ANPR that the Federal Reserve released today incorporates ideas from public comments on past rulemaking notices, research, and our discussions with the other banking                                                       and Jessica Battisto, “Double Jeopardy: COVID-19’s Concentrated Health and Wealth Effects in Black Communities” (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, August 2020),  https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/media/smallbusiness/DoubleJeopardy_COVID19andBlackOwnedBusinesses; and Nishesh Chalise et al., Perspectives from Main Street: The Impact of COVID-19 on Low- to Moderate-Income Communities and the Entities Serving Them (Atlanta: Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, August 2020), https://www.frbatlanta.org/-/media/documents/community-development/publications/national-covid-19-survey/2020/08/the-impact-of-covid-19-on-low-to-moderate-income-communities.pdf. 9 See Raphael Bostic, “A Moral and Economic Imperative to End Racism” Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta (website), June 12, 2020, https://www.frbatlanta.org/about/feature/2020/06/12/bostic-a-moral-and-economic-imperative-to-end-racism. 10 See Raphael W. Bostic and Hyojung Lee, “Small Business Lending under the Community Reinvestment Act,” Cityscape, 19, no. 2 (2017): 63-84.  See also Hyojung Lee and Raphael W. Bostic, “Bank Adaptation to Neighborhood Change: Mortgage Lending and the Community Reinvestment Act,” Journal of Urban Economics 116 (March 2020); and Lei Ding and Carolina K. Reid, “The Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) and Bank Branching Patterns,” Housing Policy Debate 30, no. 1 (November 2019): 27-45. 
- 4 -  agencies.  Our proposal also reflects extensive outreach through the 29 CRA roundtables we held across the country with community and industry leaders and community members.  I traveled to Colorado to participate in the first roundtable and to hear from women and minority small business owners about the loans that are enabling their businesses to thrive and the bankers who are providing credit and community development activities in their communities.11  I made similar visits to communities in areas ranging from El Paso’s colonias to Kansas City, from Pine Ridge to Milwaukee, from the Mississippi Delta to Ferguson, Missouri, and from Hazard, Kentucky, to Rochester, New York.  Despite wide variations, in all of these places, I met people working to strengthen their communities.   To ensure its continued effectiveness in supporting these efforts, the CRA regulation must evolve along with the landscape of banking and community development.  To that end, the Board’s ANPR seeks to advance the CRA’s core purpose of addressing inequities in credit access and ensuring an inclusive financial services industry.  In addition, the ANPR seeks to provide more certainty and consistency, tailor expectations to local conditions and bank business models, and minimize burden.  Finally, we intend for the feedback on the ANPR to provide a foundation for the banking agencies to converge on a consistent regulatory approach that has broad support among stakeholders.  Guided by these broad goals, I will discuss the key changes we are proposing.                                                           11 See Lael Brainard, “Community Investment in Denver” (speech at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Denver Branch, October 15, 2018), https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/brainard20181015a.htm. 
- 5 -  Advancing the Core Purpose of the CRA Promoting Financial Inclusion  We seek to modernize the CRA in a way that significantly expands financial inclusion. By being inclusive in their lending and investing, banks help their local communities to thrive, which in turn benefits their core business.  The recognition of this mutually beneficial relationship between banks and their local communities is one of the core strengths of the CRA. To strengthen the CRA’s role in financial inclusion, the ANPR proposes to expand and clarify CRA-eligible activities that support minority depository institutions (MDIs), community development financial institutions (CDFIs), women-owned financial institutions, and low-income credit unions.  Given the disproportionate impact of COVID-19 on communities of color, it is important to support the institutions that have a mission to serve the families, entrepreneurs, and homeowners in these communities.  In May, Governor Miki Bowman and I heard from leaders of Federal Reserve-regulated MDIs about how COVID had hit their communities and the proactive efforts MDIs were taking to bolster their communities’ resilience by extending credit to existing and new customers, calling each borrower that applied for a Paycheck Protection Program loan to help them navigate the process, and working with customers to modify and defer payments on existing loans.12  The Board’s proposal would clarify that banks can receive credit for partnerships with MDIs and other mission-oriented institutions on a nationwide basis, and that such activities would be considered as part of a potential pathway to an “outstanding” rating.  Furthermore, for regulated MDIs, investments in other MDIs and in their own institutions could be considered as enhancing their CRA performance.                                                         12 Minority Depository Institutions Leadership Forum via Webex with Governors Miki Bowman and Lael Brainard (May 13, 2020). 
- 6 -  Moreover, the ANPR proposes to designate certain areas, based on persistent inequities, where banks could receive credit for community development activities that often lie beyond the boundaries of a bank’s branches.  For instance, many of the places that I have visited, such as in the colonias, the Mississippi Delta, Appalachia, and Indian Country, have few bank branches and are located outside of branch-based assessment areas.  Banks need to be confident about receiving CRA credit to seek out activities and investments in these areas. The ANPR raises a variety of additional ideas that could be significant for financial inclusion.  It proposes giving banks greater certainty that their community development activities will be considered in broader statewide and regional areas, in addition to activities within their local communities, so that banks could help address needs in “credit deserts” if they have the capacity to do so.  In considering economic development, the ANPR considers that loans to the smallest businesses, smallest farms, and minority-owned small businesses might be considered impactful and responsive to community needs.  In addition, the ANPR proposes elevating the focus on the availability of checking account and savings account products in serving LMI communities. Finally, in considering how the CRA’s purpose and history relate to the nation’s current challenges, the Board seeks feedback on what other modifications and approaches would strengthen the CRA regulation in addressing systemic inequities in credit access for minority individuals and communities.    Meeting the Needs of LMI Individuals and Communities It is important for the CRA to ensure that a wide range of LMI banking needs are met.  We heard from stakeholder feedback that both retail and community development activities are 
- 7 -  important in meeting LMI banking needs.  Accordingly, we propose to assess large retail banks using a separate Retail Test and a Community Development Test with separate financing and services subtests (figure 3).  Separate assessments of retail lending, retail services, community development financing, and community development services will support robust bank engagement with communities through a variety of channels.  Stakeholder feedback has highlighted that each of these areas is essential to LMI communities.  The standalone Retail Lending Test is important to stay true to the CRA’s core focus on providing credit in underserved communities.  Retail lending is the channel through which a family can get a mortgage to buy its first house and an entrepreneur can get a loan for a small business.  Retail services are the channel through which an LMI household might get access to essential services from a local bank branch, such as a low-cost checking account.  Community development financing captures bank lending and investments that create and maintain affordable housing, promote economic development, and revitalize and stabilize LMI communities.  Community development services include financial counseling for low-income families and important volunteer activities undertaken by bank staff, such as serving on the board of a local nonprofit.   Some of these activities lend themselves primarily to a qualitative review.  For example, the ANPR highlights essential banking services that are responsive to community needs, such as customer support that is provided in multiple languages and flexible branch hours to accommodate LMI customers’ work schedules.  Although we concluded that the value of services to a local community does not lend itself easily to a monetary value metric, the ANPR proposes introducing quantitative benchmarks where appropriate, such as indicators of whether branch locations are maintained or increased in underserved areas. 
- 8 -  Addressing Changes in the Banking Industry The ANPR proposes to modernize CRA assessment areas in recognition that reliance on mobile and internet banking has increased in the 25 years since the CRA regulation was last substantially revised.  The ANPR still maintains a focus on branches, given their importance to individuals and communities.  It also proposes to tailor the facility-based assessment area definition based on bank size.   For large banks that conduct a significant amount of lending and deposit-taking outside of their facility-based assessment areas, the ANPR presents options for determining where banks should be assessed outside of where their branches are located.  Defining lending-based assessment areas is one option, but the preliminary analysis of this approach provided in the ANPR finds that banks’ lending outside of their current assessment areas is widely dispersed and often occurs in places that are already well served.  Defining deposit-based assessment areas is another option, but it would entail some additional data reporting burden, and we do not currently have the data to analyze this option closely.  For internet banks, which lend across a broad area with few or no branch locations, a nationwide assessment area may advance the CRA’s goals more effectively than the current practice of assessing these banks solely where they have a headquarters office.   Providing Certainty and Consistency, Minimizing Burden, and Tailoring Expectations Providing Clarity, Consistency, and Transparency  The ANPR seeks to provide greater clarity and consistency through tailored performance evaluations.  Responding to calls for greater certainty regarding how banks are assessed and rated, the ANPR introduces a metrics-based approach that is calibrated based on over 6,000 
- 9 -  written public CRA evaluations.13  Separating the Retail Test and the Community Development Test provides greater scope to tailor the metrics to local market conditions, which often differ for retail lending and community development financing.  This approach would create clear quantitative thresholds for the level of retail lending and community development financing that is needed to achieve a “satisfactory” CRA rating.   For the Retail Lending Subtest, which would apply to large retail banks and any small banks that choose to opt in, banks could earn a presumption of a “satisfactory” performance conclusion in an assessment area by reaching clear thresholds of lending to LMI borrowers and neighborhoods in each of their major product lines.  The thresholds would be tailored to local market conditions and adjust automatically to reflect changes over the business cycle.  They would be based on local data that reflect the credit needs and opportunities among LMI individuals, communities, small businesses, and small farms and on market data that reflect the level of LMI lending in the area by all lenders.  Federal Reserve analysis confirms there are large differences in LMI lending opportunities among assessment areas, which illustrates the importance of tailoring the retail lending thresholds to the needs of the local community (figure 4).  The ANPR also considers using the same metrics relative to performance ranges to produce a recommended Retail Lending Subtest conclusion of “outstanding,” “satisfactory,” “needs to improve,” or “substantial noncompliance.”  We encourage commenters to make use of the CRA Analytics Data Tables that we published in March in order to evaluate the presumption threshold options and performance ranges and provide feedback.                                                         13 Federal Reserve staff created a database based on over 6,000 written public CRA performance evaluations from a sample of 3,700 banks of varying asset sizes, business models, geographic areas, and bank regulators. The database includes the location, number, and amount of CRA-eligible loans and investments and the ratings associated with each bank’s performance from 2005 to 2017.  See Federal Reserve Board, “CRA Analytics Data Tables,” March 6, 2020, https://www.federalreserve.gov/consumerscommunities/data_tables.htm.  
- 10 -  For the Community Development Financing Subtest, the Board is proposing to measure a large retail bank’s community development loans and investments relative to its deposits in each assessment area.  The thresholds for the Community Development Financing Subtest would be calibrated using local and national data.  When we looked at past performance evaluations, we found that community development financing varies widely across different assessment areas, likely reflecting different levels of community development capacity and the unique needs and challenges of different communities.  For example, in San Diego, California, the total dollar amount of banks’ community financing activities relative to their deposits is three times higher than in Little Rock, Arkansas (figure 5).  In addition, metropolitan areas overall have a higher level of community development financing relative to deposits than rural areas overall.  For these reasons, it is important to tailor the Community Development Financing Subtest using thresholds that account for these differences and adjust automatically to changes over time.   To provide certainty and transparency, the retail lending and community development financing thresholds would be made available in simple, regularly updated dashboards that banks could use to compare their level of activity to the thresholds in each assessment area (figure 6).  For example, a dashboard for the Retail Lending Subtest could show the thresholds that a large retail bank should reach for each of its major product lines to receive the presumption of “satisfactory,” including the percentage of loans to LMI borrowers and the percentage of loans to LMI neighborhoods.  Tailoring Performance Evaluations to Bank Size and Business Model  The proposed separate subtests would also ensure expectations are tailored to the size and business models of different banks.  It is important for smaller banks to be able to remain under 
- 11 -  the current more qualitative approach if they so choose.  Accordingly, small retail banks could continue to be evaluated under the current CRA framework, but they would have the option to have their retail lending evaluated under the metrics-based Retail Lending Subtest.  Small banks could also elect to have their retail services and community development activities evaluated.   Wholesale and limited purpose banks would be evaluated only on their community development activities.  The ANPR solicits feedback on options for additional tailoring and flexibility for these institutions, which do not lend themselves to evaluation under the same metrics that would be applicable to large retail banks.    Minimizing Data Collection and Reporting Burden  The ANPR seeks comment on striking an appropriate balance between providing greater certainty for how banks are assessed through the increased use of metrics and minimizing the associated data collection and reporting burden.  In an effort to reduce burden, the proposed metrics would rely to the greatest extent possible on existing data collections and public data sources, and the approach would exempt small banks from deposit and certain other data collection requirements.   Large banks currently report community development loans at an aggregated level.  A bank may also share information with its examiner on its community development loans and investments in a specific assessment area during a CRA exam.  However, the bank does not formally report data on these activities for each assessment area, nor are the data currently available through other sources.  Without reporting data more consistently to provide the basis for comparison, it would be difficult to measure and evaluate a large bank’s community development performance in a more consistent and predictable way.   
- 12 -  Clarify and Expand Eligible CRA Activities to Focus on Communities  The ANPR proposes updating and clarifying which community development activities qualify in order to provide greater certainty to banks and communities about what counts.  The ANPR proposes to publish and regularly update an illustrative, but not necessarily exhaustive, list of qualifying activities.  To provide additional certainty, the Board also seeks feedback on a preapproval process, so that banks can propose a community development activity to their examiner to determine whether it will qualify before proceeding with the loan, investment, or service activity.  This additional certainty could help promote greater investment by banks while retaining a focus on LMI communities. In addition, the ANPR seeks feedback about clarifying the definitions of qualifying activities and broadening certain definitions in targeted ways.  For example, the Board is considering defining CRA-eligible activities that create or preserve naturally occurring affordable housing and is considering whether to broaden the set of volunteer activities that would qualify in rural areas.  The Board is also clarifying when a government or tribal plan is required to qualify activities that revitalize and stabilize communities.  This is especially important in Indian Country, where we want to encourage banks to make impactful investments that have the support of tribal governments and to increase certainty about how these activities qualify for CRA credit.  Recognizing the Special Circumstances of Small Banks in Rural Areas   Stakeholder feedback emphasized that smaller retail banks play a vital role in many underserved communities, such as in rural areas.  Accordingly, the ANPR provides small banks in rural areas operating in just a portion of a large county greater clarity and flexibility in 
- 13 -  tailoring the facility-based assessment area definition.  The ANPR proposes that a small bank would not be required to expand the delineation of an assessment area to include parts of counties where it does not have a physical presence and where it either engages in a de minimis amount of lending or there is substantial competition from other institutions, except in limited circumstances.  In addition, the ANPR proposes to revise the definition of community development services to include a wider range of volunteer activities to address the particular needs of rural areas.  The Path Ahead It has been 25 years since the last significant revision to the CRA regulation, so it is important to get reform right.  We are providing an extended 120-day comment period to allow ample time for thoughtful feedback from a broad set of stakeholders.  The input from stakeholders thus far has been tremendously valuable, and we appreciate the care and concern expressed in the many comment letters and other forms of input on this important regulation.  In the weeks and months ahead, we look forward to reviewing your comments and analyzing options for greater impact, including changes to address the inequities and challenges faced by minority communities and individuals.  This feedback is critically important, and we are ready to listen. Stakeholders have expressed strong support for the agencies to work together to modernize the CRA.  By reflecting stakeholder views and providing a long period for public comment, the ANPR is intended to build a foundation for the banking agencies to converge on a consistent approach to strengthening the CRA that has broad support among stakeholders.  With your continued ideas and engagement, I am confident we can come together on a stronger, 
- 14 -  transparent, and tailored approach to the CRA that will benefit LMI communities across the country for years to come.  
Strengthening the CRA to Meet the Challenges of Our TimeSeptember 21, 2020Lael BrainardBoard of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
BOARD OF GOVERNORS of theFEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM2Example of a historical redlining mapSource: Robert K. Nelson, LaDaleWinling, Richard Marciano, Nathan Connolly, et al., “Mapping Inequality,”American Panorama, ed., https://dsl.richmond.edu/panorama/redlining/#loc=4/36.71/-96.93&text=intro.Figure 1. HOLC Map of Atlanta, 1938
BOARD OF GOVERNORS of theFEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM3Minority-owned small businesses less likely to access bank financing46%23%34%Non-Hispanic WhiteNon-Hispanic BlackHispanicSource: Federal Reserve System 2019 Small Business Credit Survey, https://www.fedsmallbusiness.org/medialibrary/FedSmallBusiness/files/2020/2020-sbcs-employer-firms-report.   Figure 2. Small Business Owners that Received Bank Funding in the Last Five Years
BOARD OF GOVERNORS of theFEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM4Retail Lending SubtestRetail Lending MetricsRetail Services SubtestQualitative Review of Delivery Systems and Deposit ProductsCD Financing SubtestCD Financing MetricCD Services SubtestQualitative ReviewRetail TestCommunity Development TestFigure 3. Evaluation Framework with Separate Retail and Community Development TestsHow to assess CRA performance for large retail banks
BOARD OF GOVERNORS of theFEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM5Demand for LMI loans varies widely across geographiesFigure 4. Examples of Retail Lending Thresholds Based on Local Data 48%56%31%21%Share of LMI familiesShare of mortgages to LMI borrowersAdams County, COSeminole County, FLSource: American Community Survey 2013-2017 5-year average data, and Home Mortgage Disclosure Act 2017 data. 
BOARD OF GOVERNORS of theFEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM6Community development activities vary widely across geographiesSource: Board analysis of CRA Analytics Data Tables and Summary of Deposits data from 2014-2017. Additional details related to these calculations can be found in the ANPR.1.1%3.0%Little Rock, ARSan Diego, CATwo Example MSAs1.4%0.9%MetropolitanNon-MetropolitanMetropolitan vs. Non-Metropolitan Assessment AreasFigure 5. Community Development Loan & Investment Dollars-to-Deposit Ratios
BOARD OF GOVERNORS of theFEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM7Figure 6. Retail Lending Dashboard ExampleABC BankAssessment Area: Any Town, USAProduct: Home Mortgage LendingEvaluation Period: 2015 to 2018Current Evaluation PeriodPRESUMPTION: SATISFACTORYBorrower Distribution MetricGeographic Distribution MetricCurrent ThresholdPerformance-to-DateDifference26%34%36%39%+8%+3%Dashboard to increase certainty and transparency
22/09/2020The Australian Economy and Monetary Policy | Speeches | RBAhttps://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2020/sp-dg-2020-09-22.html1/13SpeechThe Australian Economy and Monetary PolicyGuy Debelle Deputy GovernorAustralian Industry Group Virtual Conference – 22 September 2020My talk today will cover three topics. First I will provide a perspective on the historic decline inoutput that both the Australian and global economies have experienced and discuss the current stateof the economy. Second I will explain how the monetary policy actions the Reserve Bank has takenare working to support the Australian economy, complementing the large fiscal response. Finally Iwill outline possibilities for further monetary policy action should the Reserve Bank Board decide thatit is warranted.The Economic Impact of the PandemicThe pandemic has resulted in a historic decline in output in the Australian and global economy.Graph 1 shows the GDP outcomes for a range of economies. It is a truly daunting picture in terms ofthe size and the synchronised nature of the declines.
22/09/2020The Australian Economy and Monetary Policy | Speeches | RBAhttps://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2020/sp-dg-2020-09-22.html2/13Graph 1First-half 2020 March quarter 2020 June quarter 2020ChinaVietnamTaiwanSouthKoreaHongKongNorwayAustraliaIndonesiaSwedenJapanNetherlandsUnitedStatesGermanyThailandCanadaNewZealandSingaporeEuroareaItalyMalaysiaFrancePhilippinesUnitedKingdomSpainIndia-30-25-20-15-10-50510%-30-25-20-15-10-50510%GDPGrowthQuarterlycontributionsSources:ABS;RBA;RefinitivWhat explains the large variation in outcomes across countries? Part of the explanation is the natureand management of the virus' impact. Some countries were affected more severely by the virus andhad mobility restrictions for longer. There is a strong positive correlation between measures ofmobility and GDP outcomes. Some part of the difference reflects the behavioural response of peoplebeyond the direct effect of mobility restrictions. Those behavioural responses are having a significantimpact on the shape of the economic recovery. A third source of variation is the share of the servicesector of the economy, which has been most affected by shutdowns. That is evident in countries likeFrance and Spain where tourism is a sizeable part of the economy.The notable exception is the Chinese economy. It experienced a 10 per cent decline in the Marchquarter of 2020 but reversed that decline in the second quarter such that output was actually a littlehigher than at the end of 2019. This reflects the earlier incidence of the virus and consequently theearlier relaxation of restrictions. There has also been substantial fiscal policy support in China,though not so much from monetary policy. The form of the fiscal support has been different to thatin other countries. It has been directed at bolstering production rather than the income support thathas comprised the bulk of the fiscal support in many other countries, including Australia. As a result,industrial production has recovered strongly whereas the rebound in retail spending has beenconsiderably less (Graph 2). The strength of the industrial and construction sectors has seen strongdemand for iron ore, with prices at multi-year highs.
22/09/2020The Australian Economy and Monetary Policy | Speeches | RBAhttps://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2020/sp-dg-2020-09-22.html3/13Graph 2China–ActivityIndicatorsDecember2019=100IndustrialproductionDJFMAMJJA20192020708090100indexRetailsalesDJFMAMJJA20192020708090100indexSources:CEICData;RBATurning to Australia, GDP declined by 7 per cent in the June quarter. This is the largest peacetimeeconomic contraction since the 1930s. While the decline was less than initially feared, it is stillhistorically large. There are a number of aspects of the outcome that are worth noting:First, while GDP and employment recorded very large declines, household income actually rose. Thisis quite a remarkable and highly unusual outcome. Normally in recessions, household income fallsalong with the decline in output and employment. This time that hasn't happened because of theincome support from the Government through JobKeeper and JobSeeker. In addition, householdcash flows have been boosted by the superannuation withdrawals and lower interest rates, as well asthe deferral of interest and rent payments (though in the latter case, they reduced income for otherhouseholds).The fact that household income rose in the quarter does not mean that the stimulus was overdone.Absent the stimulus, the decline in GDP and employment would have been significantly larger andthere would have been much greater financial hardship. That households saved a large amount ofthis income support means that their balance sheets are in a considerably better place than wouldnormally be the case in a recession. They are better placed to support the recovery as it unfolds. Thetransfer from the strong balance sheet of the government to bolster the balance sheet of thehousehold sector is an entirely appropriate and timely policy response.
22/09/2020The Australian Economy and Monetary Policy | Speeches | RBAhttps://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2020/sp-dg-2020-09-22.html4/13Second, business incomes were also supported by the JobKeeper payments, as well as loan and rentdeferrals. Nevertheless, business investment declined by 4 per cent in the quarter, as the large risein uncertainty significantly curtailed investment plans. The effect of the uncertainty hassignificantly outweighed the stimulatory effect of the decline in business borrowing costs. Thedecline in investment would have been larger absent the effect of the instant asset write-off, whichwas evident in a pick-up in business spending on computer equipment and vehicles towards the endof the June quarter.Turning to the labour market, hours worked remains a useful way to gauge what is happening, giventhe impact of JobKeeper on other measures of the labour market. Hours worked declined by10 per cent from peak to a trough around early May. Since then they have grown by around6 per cent nationally, though that is being held back by the impact of the lockdown in Victoria. Theunemployment rate in August was 6.8 per cent, which was better than expected. However, therecovery in the labour market is likely to be bumpy and uneven and we still expect theunemployment rate to rise from here.The CPI outcome for the June quarter was affected by a number of unusual developments. Mycolleague Luci Ellis talked about this in detail last month. Inflation is being affected by some verylarge relative price movements. There were large declines in child care costs and petrol, both ofwhich will be partly reversed in the current quarter, while some retail prices rose at a relatively rapidrate in the June quarter.I do not see there is any risk of a sustained rise in inflation while there remains considerable sparecapacity in the economy. In particular, the high unemployment rate will mean that wage growth,which was not strong pre-pandemic, will remain subdued. As wage costs are a major factor affectingprices, inflation will remain contained for some time. Moreover, the declines in rents that wereevident in the June quarter as a large amount of extra supply came into the rental market are alsolikely to persist and will also restrain inflation.We are now nearing the end of the September quarter. How is the Australian economy evolving afterthat large decline in output? Most indicators of activity and the labour market troughed in early May.Since then we have seen a recovery in a number of these indicators, though there has beensubstantial variation across the country. I will illustrate this using the payrolls data (Graph 3).[1][2][3][4]
22/09/2020The Australian Economy and Monetary Policy | Speeches | RBAhttps://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2020/sp-dg-2020-09-22.html5/13Graph 3PayrollJobsbyState*Weekending14March2020=100MAMJJA2020859095100indexNSWVicMAMJJA2020WAQldMAMJJA2020859095100indexSATas*Excludesfirmsnotreportingthroughsingle-touchpayrollandself-employedpersonsSources:ABS;RBAThe strongest recovery has been in WA. Part of this reflects the turnaround in investment in theresources sector that was already in train before the onset of the pandemic. There has also been asharp rebound in activity in the housing sector in WA boosted by the support from both the federaland state governments. The pick-up in WA has been such that some of the Bank's business liaisoncontacts are reporting that in some skill areas they are finding it hard to find labour, particularly withthe border closures. At the other end of the scale is Victoria, where the impact of the lockdown isvery evident. We estimate that the lockdown in Victoria has subtracted around 2 per cent fromnational GDP in the September quarter.Overall, the recovery has not been a rapid bounce but more of a slow grind. The virus is having itseffect, particularly because of the lockdown in Victoria, but so too is the shortfall in demand thatoccurs in recessionary conditions. That shortfall in demand will be a significant brake on therecovery. Until households and businesses are confident about future demand and income, they willbe reluctant to spend and invest.The Effect of Monetary Policy ActionsFiscal policy is having the largest impact in shaping the outcomes in the economy. But the monetarypolicy actions are also having a material influence. The monetary policy action taken by the Reserve
22/09/2020The Australian Economy and Monetary Policy | Speeches | RBAhttps://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2020/sp-dg-2020-09-22.html6/13Bank since March has a number of elements which complement each other. They are aimed atsupporting the recovery by lowering borrowing rates for households and business as well as thegovernment and supporting the supply of credit.The various monetary policy actions have led to a significant increase in the size of the RBA's balancesheet from $170 billion in February to $300 billion currently. I will spell this out in more detailshortly. The consequent large amount of liquidity in the system is underpinning low money marketrates for the financial system; the cash rate and bank bill swap rates (BBSW) are at historic lows(Graph 4). Given these rates underpin the whole spectrum of bank funding costs, funding costs havedeclined to historically low levels. These low funding costs have been passed through to record lowborrowing costs for households and businesses.Graph 420192018201720200.00.51.01.52.0%0.00.51.01.52.0%AustralianMoneyMarketRatesCashrate3-monthBBSWSources:ASX;RBAThe cash rate target was reduced to 25 basis points. The traded cash rate sits below that at 13–14 basis points given the abundance of liquidity in the system, reflected in the large rise in ExchangeSettlement (ES) balances. ES balances have risen to around $50 billion and were as high as$90 billion in recent months; considerably larger than the $2–3 billion that prevailed before thepandemic. The low level of the cash rate is anchored by the interest rate paid on banks' ES balancesat the RBA, which is set at 10 basis points.The high level of ES balances is the result of a number of actions by the Reserve Bank. First, itreflects the large provision of liquidity in the early days of the pandemic through the Bank's dailymarket operations. Second, it is a direct consequence of the Bank's purchases of government[5][6]
22/09/2020The Australian Economy and Monetary Policy | Speeches | RBAhttps://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2020/sp-dg-2020-09-22.html7/13bonds. When the Reserve Bank buys bonds in the secondary market, it directly boosts the bankingsystem's deposits. Third, the funds provided under the Term Funding Facility (TFF) have substantiallyincreased liquidity. These funds are lent by the RBA to the banking system for a term of three yearsand at a fixed rate of 25 basis points.The initial allowance of the TFF was 3 per cent of credit extended by the banking system or$84 billion. That allowance has been gradually taken up over the past six months, and particularly inrecent weeks, such that take-up currently stands at $75 billion. Different types of institutions,whether large, medium-sized or small, have accessed similar shares of funding from the TFF.The Reserve Bank Board announced an extension of the TFF following its September meeting. Thisamounts to an additional 2 per cent of credit, and is available to be drawn until June 2021. Whydid the Board take this decision? Given the protracted nature of the recovery, the Board considered itappropriate to provide more funding and for a longer period to support the Australian economy inthe recovery. The larger amount of funding available, at least 5 per cent of total credit, is a furthereasing in the stance of monetary policy. It will result in a further material expansion of the RBA'sbalance sheet for the next three years.What impact are we seeing from the take-up of the TFF?First, the TFF has lowered lending rates by lowering bank funding costs. The TFF funding isconsiderably cheaper than wholesale funding of similar maturity.Second, it is having a noticeable effect on the composition of bank funding. It is important to keep inmind that funding is fungible for banks. It is not possible to say to what purpose particular sources offunds are being put or which they are replacing. But the funding structure of the banking system haschanged significantly over the past six months as a result of the TFF together with the increase indeposit funding.There has been a reduction in offshore wholesale funding, which is of a very similar size to the take-up of TFF funding (Graph 5). The amount of domestic wholesale funding is little changed. Bankshave chosen to let their offshore funding roll off as it matures.[7]
22/09/2020The Australian Economy and Monetary Policy | Speeches | RBAhttps://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2020/sp-dg-2020-09-22.html8/13Graph 52018201620142012201020200100200300$b0100200300$bWholesaleFundingofBanksinAustraliaAmountsoutstandingOffshorebondsDomesticbondsTFFSources:Bloomberg;PrivatePlacementMonitor;RBAThe banks can use the TFF funds to expand their lending, to replace more expensive sources offunding or to buy other assets, including government debt. Funding is fungible, but we can see thatall of these options are being taken up by banks.The final element of the Board's package is the target for the three-year Australian Governmentbond yield. This is a price-based target for bond purchases, rather than the quantitative target forbond purchases announced by many other central banks. You can think of it as an extension of thecash rate target, where the target is for three years rather than overnight. That increased horizon forthe target is aligned with the Board's forward guidance, which I will come to shortly.In saying that it is a price-based target, it is important to remember that in maintaining the three-year yield target the Bank is still buying the quantities of bonds required to achieve that. Thosepurchases have their effect on maintaining the three-year yield at the target but they also have thesame portfolio substitution effect as the quantitative easing programs of other central banks.The three-year yield target is for the Australian Government bond nearest to a three-year maturity(Graph 6). Since the introduction of the target, that bond has been the April 2023 maturity. In a fewweeks' time, it will switch to being the April 2024 maturity. There is a reasonable amount ofsubstitutability between these two bonds as they are both in the three-year futures basket. Wewouldn't want a dislocative jump as the target bond changes, and indeed we have seen the spread
22/09/2020The Australian Economy and Monetary Policy | Speeches | RBAhttps://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2020/sp-dg-2020-09-22.html9/13between these two bonds narrow as the market has focused on the transition. The Bank has beenpurchasing both bonds in our operations in recent weeks to maintain the target.Graph 6JFMAMJJAS20200.000.250.500.75%0.000.250.500.75%AustralianGovernmentBondYieldsApril2024April2023Targetintroducedon19March2020Source:YieldbrokerIt is worth reiterating that there are two related but separate motivations for the Bank's governmentbond purchases since March. The first is to achieve the Board's target for the three-year AustralianGovernment bond yield. The second objective is to address dysfunction in the Australian and stategovernment bond markets.The three-year yield declined reasonably quickly to the target so it didn't require large purchases toachieve the target. Rather, the bulk of the purchases in March and April was to address dysfunctionin government bond markets. The Bank purchased both Australian Government Securities (AGS)and semi-government securities (semis) out to a maturity of 10 years to help restore marketfunction. Since the bond market has returned to functioning normally, purchases have been directedto maintaining the three-year target. The Bank continues to stand ready to purchase both AGS andsemis to help support market functioning.I said earlier that the three-year yield target is closely aligned with the Board's guidance about thefuture direction of the cash rate target. The Board has consistently stated that it will not increase thecash rate target until progress is being made towards full employment and it is confident thatinflation will be sustainably within the 2–3 per cent target band. In the August Statement onMonetary Policy, the forecast was for the unemployment rate to rise to 10 per cent at the end of the[8]
22/09/2020The Australian Economy and Monetary Policy | Speeches | RBAhttps://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2020/sp-dg-2020-09-22.html10/13year and (in the central scenario) to decline gradually to be 7 per cent by the end of 2022. While therecent labour market release indicates outcomes could be better than this, there would still need tobe a significant further decline in the unemployment rate before the Australian labour market wouldbe nearing full employment. Prior to the pandemic, the unemployment rate was around 5 per cent.That was not low enough to generate sufficient wage growth consistent with achieving the inflationtarget.Under the central scenario, it would be more than three years before sufficient progress was beingmade towards full employment to be confident that inflation will be sustainably within the targetband. In this scenario, it is highly unlikely that the cash rate will be raised over that time horizon.This aligns with the target for the three-year bond yield of around 25 basis points.To summarise, the bond purchases and the TFF funding have resulted in a large expansion in theRBA balance sheet. The balance sheet has nearly doubled from $170 billion to $300 billion, which isa substantial easing in monetary policy. In many ways, these actions are as stimulatory as aquantitative easing program of the same size. They are providing substantial liquidity to Australianfinancial markets and underpinning the historically low level of interest rates.Other Options for Monetary PolicyGiven the outlook for inflation and employment is not consistent with the Bank's objectives over theperiod ahead, the Board continues to assess other policy options. The Governor talked about theseoptions at the Anika Foundation event in July.One option considered is to buy bonds further out along the curve, supplementing the three-yearyield target. Purchases would still be conducted to maintain the target for the three-year bond, butadditional purchases could occur further out the curve on a regular basis. This would have the effectof further lowering government bond rates at longer maturities. Very few financial instruments inAustralia price off these yields. This is in contrast to the US where the 10-year Treasury yield is a keypricing benchmark for mortgage rates. The Board has focussed on the three-year yield as the target,because Australian financial instruments price predominantly off the shorter end of the curve. Theseinstitutional differences across countries are important and affect the design and transmission ofmonetary policy actions.Bond purchases have a portfolio balance effect in addition to the interest rate effect. When a centralbank buys government bonds, it is exchanging a shorter duration asset (cash) for longer durationone (the bond). This incentivises investors to switch into other assets, including potentially foreignassets, to get that duration exposure. This lowers interest rates on other financial assets and alsocan contribute to a lower exchange rate. It is difficult to separate the portfolio balance effect fromthe effect of lower government bond rates empirically. Nevertheless, additional bond purchaseswould have some effect in lowering longer-term interest rates.The current level of government bond rates is not a constraint on the fiscal decisions of theAustralian and state governments. They all have strong balance sheets, with debt stocks that are lowrelative to other jurisdictions, even taking account of the current sizeable fiscal stimulus. The[9]
22/09/2020The Australian Economy and Monetary Policy | Speeches | RBAhttps://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2020/sp-dg-2020-09-22.html11/13increase in debt is definitely manageable. Moreover, there is not, in my judgement, a trade-offbetween debt and supporting the Australian economy in the current circumstance. Absent the fiscalstimulus, the economy would be significantly weaker and debt levels even higher. This is particularlyso with interest rates at their historically low levels, where the growth benefit from the fiscal stimuluswill improve the debt dynamics and help service the debt in the future.Foreign exchange intervention is another potential policy option. However, with the Australian dollarbroadly aligned with its fundamentals, it is not clear this would be effective in the currentcircumstances. The Swiss experience over the past decade (ahead of the introduction of the ceilingon the Swiss franc) illustrates the issues that can arise in terms of the effectiveness of foreignexchange intervention when a currency is not far from its fundamental value.It is also important to remember that the exchange rate is a relative price. Part of the recentmovements in the Australian dollar reflects the depreciation of the US dollar against other majorcurrencies. It also reflects the high price of iron ore I mentioned earlier. The relatively better growthoutcomes in Australia compared with other economies shown in Graph 1 are having an influence too.That said, a lower exchange rate would definitely be beneficial for the Australian economy, so we arecontinuing to watch developments in the foreign exchange market carefully.A third option is to lower the current structure of rates in the economy a little more without goinginto negative territory. The remuneration on ES balances is currently 10 basis points, the three-yearyield target is at 25 basis points and the borrowing rate of the TFF is also 25 basis points. It ispossible to further reduce these interest rates.A fourth option is negative rates. The Governor has talked about this before. I will just make afew points here. The empirical evidence on negative rates is mixed. In the short-term, they cancontribute to a lower exchange rate. In the medium term, the effectiveness can wane includingthrough the effect on the financial system. Negative rates can also encourage more saving ashouseholds look to preserve the value of their saving, particularly in an environment where they arealready inclined to save rather than spend. That is, the income effect can be larger than thesubstitution effect. To date, those economies with negative policy rates have not lowered themfurther. Instead, they have eased monetary policy settings through other means.ConclusionThe Australian and the global economies have undergone historic contractions as a result of thepandemic. We are now in a gradual and uneven recovery. The recovery is being supported bysizeable fiscal stimulus, particularly in terms of income support for households and business.Monetary policy is playing its role in supporting the economy. There has been a large expansion inthe RBA balance sheet resulting from the Board's policy actions. This expansion comes from the TFFand the government bond purchases to achieve the yield target and address dysfunction in the bondmarket. This constitutes a substantial easing in monetary policy. These actions are underpinning thehistorically low interest rates for households and business as well as the government.[10][11][12]
22/09/2020The Australian Economy and Monetary Policy | Speeches | RBAhttps://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2020/sp-dg-2020-09-22.html12/13The Board decided to further expand and extend the size of the TFF at the September meeting,which will further increase the size of the Bank's balance sheet. As the outlook for the Australianeconomy unfolds, the Board will continue to assess the merits of the range of monetary options tobest support the economic recovery.EndnotesThis is very evident in the investment expectations measured in the ABS Capital Expenditure Survey.[1]This is not a surprising outcome. Empirical macroeconomic models of business investment struggle to find muchdirect impact of borrowing rates on investment. Current and expected aggregate demand have the predominantinfluence. This is the case in the MARTIN model of the RBA, as well as much of the macroeconomic research onbusiness investment. See Ballantyne A, T Cusbert, R Evans, R Guttmann, J Hambur, A Hamilton, E Kendall, RMcCririck, G Nodari and D Rees (2019), ‘MARTIN Has Its Place: A Macroeconometric Model of the AustralianEconomyPDF’, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2019-07; Chirinko RS (1993), ‘Business Fixed InvestmentSpending: Modeling Strategies, Empirical Results, and Policy Implications’, Journal of Economic Literature, 31(4),pp 1875–1911; Caballero RJ (1999), ‘Aggregate Investment’, in JB Taylor and M Woodford (eds), Handbook ofMacroeconomics: Volume 1B, Handbooks in Economics 15, Elsevier Science, Amsterdam, pp 813–862; and CockerellL and S Pennings (2007), ‘Private Business Investment in Australia’, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2007-09.[2]Ellis L (2020), ‘The Economic Outlook’, Speech at the Australian Business Economists Lunchtime Briefing, online,7 August.[3]The payrolls data is one of a number of innovations that the ABS has introduced that has helped significantly intracking the economy through this challenging episode.[4]ES balances are the deposits the banking system holds at the RBA.[5]The demand for liquidity in the Bank's daily market operations has declined since the early days of the pandemic.This reflects the fact that the system has abundant liquidity, and the growing take-up of the TFF. However, the TFFis not necessarily a complete substitute for the liquidity provided at the Bank's daily market operations, since theBank's counterparties have different motivations for seeking funding at particular maturities.[6]The Board also extended the drawdown deadline for the additional allowance available under the TFF until June2021. The additional allowance incentivises banks to expand their lending to businesses. Banks obtain an additional$5 of TFF funding for every $1 they lend to SMEs, and an additional $1 of funding for every $1 they lend to largebusinesses.[7]Again, given the substitutability between government bonds, it is not really possible to allocate the bonds purchasedto each of these two motives.[8]See Lowe P (2020), ‘COVID-19, the Labour Market and Public Sector Balance Sheets’, Address to the AnikaFoundation, online, 21 July; and the Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board on 7 July2020.[9]There is the possibility of a ratings downgrade from higher debt, but that really only has a political dimension not afinancial dimension, as government bond rates would likely be little changed. In any case, a rating agency shouldnot be the determinant of fiscal policy. Fiscal policy should be set to be the most beneficial for the Australianeconomy and people.[10]See Lowe P (2019), ‘Unconventional Monetary Policy: Some Lessons From Overseas’, Address to Australian BusinessEconomists Dinner, Sydney, 26 November; Lowe P (2020), ‘Opening Statement to the House of RepresentativesStanding Committee on Economics’, Canberra, 7 February; Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve[11]
22/09/2020The Australian Economy and Monetary Policy | Speeches | RBAhttps://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2020/sp-dg-2020-09-22.html13/13The materials on this webpage are subject to copyright and their use is subject to the terms and conditions set out in the Copyrightand Disclaimer Notice.© Reserve Bank of Australia, 2001–2020. All rights reserved.The Reserve Bank of Australia acknowledges the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples of Australia as the Traditional Custodians of thisland, and recognises their continuing connection to Country. We pay our respects to their Elders, past, present and emerging.Bank Board on 7 July 2020; and Commonwealth (2020), ‘Reserve Bank of Australia Annual Report 2019’, House ofRepresentatives Standing Committee on Economics public hearing, 14 August 2020, available at:<https://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Committees/House/Economics/RBAReview2019-2/Public_Hearings>.See Boucinha M and L Burlon (2020), ‘Negative Rates and the Transmission of Monetary Policy’, ECB EconomicBulletin, Issue 3/2020, available at <https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-bulletin/articles/2020/html/ecb.ebart202003_02~4768be84e7.en.html#toc1>; Arseneau D (2020), ‘How Would USBanks Fare in a Negative Interest Rate Environment?’, Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-030r1,Washington, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, available at:<https://doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2017.030r1>; Committee on the Global Financial System (2019), ‘Unconventionalmonetary policy tools: a cross-country analysis’, CGFS Paper No 63, available at:<https://www.bis.org/publ/cgfs63.htm>; Agarwal R and M Kimball (2019), ‘Enabling Deep Negative Rates to FightRecessions: A Guide’, IMF Working Paper No 19/84, available at<https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WP/Issues/2019/04/29/Enabling-Deep-Negative-Rates-A-Guide-46598>.[12]
SPEECHAsymmetric risks, asymmetric reaction: monetary policy in the pandemic Speech by Fabio Panetta, Member of the Executive Board of the ECB, at the meeting of the ECB Money Market Contact GroupFrankfurt am Main, 22 September 2020It is a pleasure to speak to the Money Market Contact Group today.Money markets and central banks have an important relationship which, when it is working well, makes monetary policy more effective. Money market prices reflect expectations of our policy and the understanding of our reaction function. They are the first stage in the transmission of our policies to financing conditions for the real economy. So I am pleased to talk to you today about how I see current issues related to monetary policy – and to hear your views in return. The ECB’s policy response to the coronavirus (COVID-19) crisisIn pursuing our price stability mandate, our policy response to the crisis had three goals. The first was to counter the downward impact of the pandemic on the projected path of inflation. The second was to ensure that all parts of the euro area had access to liquidity, which was crucial for weathering the lockdown. And finally, we sought to avoid damaging feedback loops between financial markets and the real economy, ensuring that other policies could play their full role in addressing the effects of the pandemic, in turn making our own policy more effective.As a result of our policy measures, tail risks have been removed and systemic stress in the euro area has receded (Chart 1). We have averted a liquidity and credit crunch, which would have amplified the collapse in activity and caused lasting damage to production capacity. Without the ECB’s action, the economic consequences of the pandemic would have been dramatic; we estimate that more than one million additional jobs would have been lost.Chart 1Euro area composite indicator of systemic stress
(index)Source: Haver Analytics.Note: See also Holló, D., Kremer, M. and Lo Duca, M. (2012), “CISS – a composite indicator of systemic stress in the financial system”, Working Paper Series, No 1426, ECB, March.Latest observation: 21 September 2020.After abruptly tightening in March, financial conditions for the euro area as a whole have since eased, as measured for example by the GDP-weighted sovereign yield curve. Fragmentation has receded substantially, as the decrease in the dispersion of sovereign bond yields shows. This has safeguarded the transmission of monetary policy, with money market rates reconnecting to the ECB policy rates and sovereign yields reconnecting to risk-free rates, as proxied by overnight index swap (OIS) rates. Euro area real rates have now returned close to their pre-pandemic levels (Chart 2). Chart 2Euro area ten-year real rate (percentages per annum)Sources: Refinitiv and ECB calculations.Notes: The real rate is constructed by subtracting the ten-year inflation-linked swap rate (ILS) from the nominal ten-year OIS rate. The vertical event lines refer to 19 February 2020 and 18 March 2020.Latest observation: 18 September 2020.To give an idea of how our measures have helped, we estimate that the pandemic emergency purchase programme (PEPP) and the additional envelope under the asset purchase programme have reduced the term premium in the average ten-year euro area sovereign yield by between 45 and 80 basis points. 
The impact on lending conditions has been significant. Our monetary policy measures, complemented by appropriate countercyclical supervisory measures, are enabling banks to keep credit flowing to households and businesses. We estimate that the funding cost relief and capital relief associated with these measures – the combination of which amplifies their individual effects – will increase loans to non-financial corporations by more than 5 percentage points over the period 2020-22; in particular, we expect our targeted longer-term refinancing operations to add 3 percentage points to loan dynamics cumulatively by 2022[1]. In July, the annual growth rate of loans to firms stood at 7%, more than double its level in February. Bank lending rates, meanwhile, have remained close to historical lows. Benefiting from these developments, industrial production and the Purchasing Managers’ Indices (PMIs) have rapidly improved, partly recuperating the previous losses (Chart 3).Chart 3Euro area Industrial production and manufacturing PMI (index)Source: Eurostat. Latest observation: July 2020 for industrial production and August 2020 for the PMI.In this crisis, our independent monetary policy and fiscal policies in the euro area have also mutually reinforced each other, thereby increasing confidence. By restoring the proper functioning of financial markets, we have removed a major obstacle to expansionary fiscal policies: the euro area aggregate budget deficit is expected to widen to 8.8% of GDP in 2020, while the GDP-weighted sovereign yield curve lies in negative territory up to the ten-year maturity. This is the opposite of what we saw during the sovereign debt crisis, when yields increased alongside deficits.Fiscal support to the economy also made our own policy more powerful. This is obvious in the case of loan guarantees, which ensure that banks do not ration credit to their borrowers in spite of increased uncertainty and credit risk. But active fiscal policy also complements monetary policy through other channels. For example, survey data show that households with more confidence in fiscal support display lower precautionary behaviour. Job protection schemes are a case in point. So, insofar as monetary policy empowers fiscal policy and increases confidence, it also empowers its own effectiveness. The current economic situationToday, our monetary policy can gradually focus less on preventing financial and productive collapse and more on securing the return of inflation to our aim. This was the explicit goal of our decision to expand and extend the PEPP in June. And our pandemic support measures are contributing to that goal. The 
measures we have introduced since March will materially support the inflation and growth outlook: according to conservative estimates by ECB staff, they are projected to increase inflation by around 0.8 percentage points cumulatively between 2020 and 2022, and GDP growth by around 1.3 percentage points.These are remarkable results, but the outlook we face is nonetheless not satisfactory yet. According to the latest ECB staff projections, inflation is expected to remain subdued and to rise to just 1.3% in 2022, still uncomfortably below our aim. Inflation excluding the volatile components of food and energy, which plays an important role in our assessment, rises to only 1.1% in 2022. Longer-term market-based inflation expectations remain very subdued and survey-based measures are at historic lows (Chart 4); real interest rates are higher than would be desirable. Turning to economic activity, the recovery remains partial and uneven; GDP is only expected to recover to pre-crisis levels by the end of 2022. Chart 4Inflation expectations in the euro area SPF inflation expectations and risk premium-adjusted 1y-in-4y ILS rate(percentages per annum)Sources: Bloomberg, Refinitiv, and ECB calculations.Latest observation: The third quarter of 2020 for the Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF) and August 2020 for the ILS. This outlook is clouded by an unprecedented degree of uncertainty, not least because it depends on uncertain public health developments. The path to recovery is also exposed to new adverse shocks – such as a possible disorderly Brexit – as well as a loss of momentum due to various emerging economic and financial headwinds.The appreciation of the euro is one factor that we need to watch closely with regard to its implications for the medium-term inflation outlook, particularly at a time when current and expected inflation rates are both very low. The sustained appreciation in the external value of the euro has brought about an undesirable tightening of financial conditions and has offset some of the monetary accommodation provided by our measures. The services sector, in which momentum has recently slowed somewhat, is another source of concern. PMIs for the services sector worsened in August, likely reflecting its high sensitivity to the rise in COVID-19 infections and renewed social distancing measures. Expenditure on several consumer services remains exceptionally low, and might be affected further by the deterioration of the public health situation in a number of euro area countries. Overall, private consumption in the second quarter of this year was 16.3% below its level at the end of 2019; consumer confidence remains well below its long-term average.
Concerns also emerge from the labour market. Close to five million people lost their jobs in the first half of this year, reversing half of the employment gains since 2013. Looking ahead, job and wage uncertainty is likely to remain elevated and give rise to continued precautionary behaviour among households.[2]Moreover, credit risk perceived by banks may adversely affect loan supply. Together with corporate balance sheet vulnerabilities, weak aggregate demand and ample spare capacity, this is likely to compress investment. Against this background, new wage negotiations may lead to weaker outcomes, further entrenching weak inflation dynamics. For as long as the number of COVID-19 cases continues to rise across Europe and new restrictions are introduced, it is hard to envisage a strong rebound in consumer sentiment and consumption. And for as long as demand remains uncertain, it is hard to see how business confidence can strengthen and investment can fully recover. This is not a normal recession, and we will not see a normal recovery without appropriate policies.Future policy calibrationIn these difficult circumstances, our policy must remain forward-looking, and there are two key elements to this. First, we need to constantly reassess whether the policy support we are providing and the calibration of our instruments are adequate to address the evolving shocks I have described and to achieve our objective of bringing inflation back to our medium-term aim in a sustained manner. If we encounter shocks that compress demand and pose additional threats to price stability, our reaction function is clearly spelled out: a policy response is necessary and forthcoming.The second element of a forward-looking policy response relates to how we assess and react to the balance of risks. In this respect, the Governing Council’s view is that the risks to growth are currently on the downside. This expression worries me more today – given the sheer size of the downside risks we face – than it would in less extreme times.[3]Moreover, given the disinflationary nature of the COVID-19 shock,[4] the low inflation expectations and the current levels of spare capacity, I consider a surge of inflation in the medium term above our aim just a remote possibility. As an example, even in a very benign scenario such as the “mild” scenario in the latest ECB staff projections – which assumes a rapid evaporation of the pandemic – inflation would reach 1.8% in 2022.Faced with such a sizeable downward skew, there is a strong case for our reaction function to be asymmetric, as the risks of a policy overreaction are much smaller than the risks of policy being too slow or too shy to react and the worst-case scenarios materialising. Against this background, macroeconomic policies – above all monetary and fiscal policies – must remain complementary and the support they provide may be needed for a long time. The credit market provides a clear example. Our bank lending survey suggests that banks would tighten credit standards considerably if public loan guarantee schemes are not maintained. Since there is evidence that these schemes have significantly suppressed the rate of corporate insolvencies, ending them prematurely at a time when even viable companies may face insurmountable financial barriers could lead to a sharp rise in corporate defaults and the associated adverse effects on banks. Similar problems would result, mutatis mutandis, from a premature tightening of financial conditions. For as long as the growth and inflation outlook are at risk, monetary policy support will have to remain substantial, and if those risks to the outlook rise, our policy impulse will have to rise in tandem. EU borrowing in response to the common shock will also be key to avoiding any fiscal cliff effects, through its support to both furlough schemes (SURE[5]) and the recovery (Next Generation EU). Structural policies also have a fundamental role to play. Given that the job-rich sectors of the economy are the hardest hit by this crisis (Chart 5), the restructuring of our economies is vital: both to generate higher overall growth rates and to produce more and better jobs in other sectors. Chart 5Employment growth and contraction due to COVID-19(percentage points (x-axis), percentage change (y-axis))
Source: Eurostat.Note: Point size denotes the size of the sector (number of persons employed in a given sector in the fourth quarter of 2019). This is particularly important for countries with weaker economies and high debt-to-GDP ratios. For these countries, the sizeable funding provided at the European level presents a unique opportunity to address concerns of competitiveness and long-term sustainability. Growth will be the only solution to the accumulation of public and private debt. ConclusionLet me conclude. Our monetary policy response to the pandemic has removed adverse tail risks, preserved very accommodative financial conditions in all parts of the euro area and leveraged complementarity with other policies. But the macroeconomic situation remains fragile and uncertain and the projected inflation path is still clearly short of our aim. Our policy must therefore remain forward-looking in terms of how we evaluate and recalibrate the amount of policy support needed, and how we assess and react to the balance of risks. All macroeconomic policies need to consider the horizon of their measures.I am now looking forward to hearing your views. Thank you.[1]Altavilla, C., Barbiero, F., Boucinha, M. and Burlon, L. (2020), “The great lockdown: pandemic response policies and bank lending conditions”, Working Paper Series, No 2465, ECB, Frankfurt am Main, September.[2]See Dossche, M. and Zlatanos, S. (2020), “COVID-19 and the increase in household savings: precautionary or forced?”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 6, ECB.[3]The “severe” scenario in the September 2020 ECB staff macroeconomic projections offers an example of the magnitude of the downside risks to growth that we face. In such a scenario, GDP growth in 2021-22 would be 4.3 percentage points lower than in the baseline scenario in cumulative terms.[4]Panetta, F. (2020), “The price of uncertainty and uncertainty about prices: monetary policy in the post-COVID-19 economy”, keynote speech at a capital markets webinar organised by the European Investment Bank and the European Stability Mechanism, 1 July.[5]European instrument for temporary Support to mitigate Unemployment Risks in an Emergency (SURE).CoronavirusPandemic emergency purchase programme (PEPP)Monetary policyUncertaintiesEconomic developmentEuro areaDisclaimerPlease note that related topic tags are currently available for selected content only.Related topics
European Central BankDirectorate General Communications Sonnemannstrasse 20, 60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany Tel.: +49 69 1344 7455, email: media@ecb.europa.euWebsite: www.ecb.europa.euReproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.Media contactsCopyright 2020, European Central Bank 
  The impact of the COVID-19 crisis on financial stability Closing address to the seminar “The financial system in the COVID-19 crisis. Challenges and commitments”, Universidad Internacional Menéndez Pelayo, organised by the Spanish Financial Press Association Pablo Hernández de Cos Governor       01.09.2020  
     1Good afternoon ladies and gentlemen. It is an honour and a pleasure to participate once again in this summer course organised by the Spanish Financial Press Association.  It is clear that the scope of the pandemic and its impact on the world economy are very extensive.  Following a 5.2% decrease in Q1, with respect to the previous quarter, Spanish GDP fell by 18.5% in Q2, when the restrictions linked to the state of alert were at their height. These declines represent the greatest contraction in economic activity in our recent history. An improving path has been seen during Q2 and Q3. However, this recovery is incomplete, and uneven across sectors and agents. It is also subject to a high level of uncertainty owing to the doubts as to the course of the pandemic itself, as shown by the fresh outbreaks. It therefore seems clear that some of the pandemic's effects will be long-lasting.  The Banco de España publishes its regular projection exercises, the next update of which is due to be released in the middle of this month, drawing on the definition of different scenarios.1 These scenarios are based on different assumptions about, among other factors, the course of the pandemic, which continues to be subject to a very high level of uncertainty. In any event, the contraction in Spanish GDP for this year as a whole will be most substantial and unprecedented in recent history. The recovery initiated in recent months should lead to relatively high growth in activity, after the hibernation brought about                                                                                               1 See Macroeconomic projections for the Spanish economy (2020-2022): the Banco de España’s contribution to the Eurosystem’s June 2020 joint forecasting exercise. 
     2by the lockdown; however some quarters of robust growth are still needed to regain the pre-pandemic level of GDP.  It is clear that the sharp macroeconomic downturn triggered by the pandemic has substantially increased the risks to global financial stability. The forceful economic policy response — from monetary, fiscal and supervisory authorities — and the effect of the far-reaching international financial reform implemented in the last decade are helping to mitigate and manage these risks. Indeed, so far the financial system has acted as a mitigating, rather than an amplifying, factor of the impact of this crisis.  However, we should not be lulled into complacency, as the scale of the shock is very large and its duration is uncertain. Against this backdrop, as economic and supervisory authorities, we must step up monitoring of the risks to financial stability and continue to adopt measures to mitigate them; naturally, we must be prepared to take forceful action should such risks materialise. Today I will outline the recent developments in the main risks in this area, based on the analysis of the effect of the crisis on the different agents in the economy (non-financial corporations, households, the real estate and financial sectors, and general government), and the most appropriate economic policy measures for addressing them.  The impact of the crisis on the financial situation of firms Spanish firms faced this shock in a more favourable financial position than that before the global financial crisis. Specifically, they had substantially reduced their debt levels in recent years, to below the European average in late 2019, and had the support of higher liquidity buffers. Moreover, the sectoral distribution of activities was more balanced than in the run-up to the previous crisis.  
     3 That said, despite the overall better position, there were certain segments of the Spanish corporate sector in a vulnerable position at the outset of this crisis. The scale of the shock triggered by the pandemic is also most significant and long-lasting, prompting a sharp decline in income for a large number of firms.  From the financial stability standpoint, the risk is that this drop in income will generate liquidity problems for these firms, making it difficult for them to meet their payment commitments deriving from financial obligations (debt and interest payments) and operating expenditure (such as supplies, rentals and personnel costs). For the firms that have been hardest hit by the crisis and those in a more vulnerable position at the outset, liquidity tensions might ultimately lead to solvency problems, either because the raising of new debt proves more complex or because the increase in debt could become unsustainable, against a backdrop, moreover, of a weak outlook for demand. The latest Central Balance Sheet Data Office figures give an idea of the severity of this shock to firms’ liquidity. There was a strongly adverse impact on these agents’ profits already in Q1, despite the fact that the sharp contractions in activity and operating revenue associated with the declaration of the state of alert only affected the last two weeks of this quarter. The reduction in the return on assets for the overall sample of firms was so significant that it pushed ROA below the cost of borrowing, a development not seen since 2014.  In the absence of, or a sharp decline in, income, firms have several, not necessarily mutually exclusive options to cover their liquidity needs. First, they can adjust their expenditure. Second, they can use the liquid assets they have built up. They can also resort to undrawn amounts on their credit lines with financial institutions, to new borrowing, such as new bank loans and debt issuances, to divestments, or to new capital contributions from their members. This list of sources of liquidity for firms highlights the important role of economic policy measures in alleviating the effects of the crisis on the business sector.  At the European level, the powerful monetary policy response from the European Central Bank (ECB) has proved essential for facilitating the financing of all European firms against this backdrop of high uncertainty, heading off financial fragmentation problems like those experienced as a result of the last crisis. Besides the approval of a new, very large asset purchase programme, this response has included the provision of liquidity to financial institutions under very favourable conditions providing they meet certain business lending targets.  In Spain, the public guarantee programmes for loans to firms, which are managed by the Official Credit Institute (ICO)2 and have reduced the risk taken on by banks when lending in such uncertain circumstances, have been crucial, as have the measures to allow for more flexibility in temporary layoffs and short-time work arrangements (ERTE by their Spanish abbreviation) and the payment deferrals on certain tax obligations, among other measures.                                                                                                     2 ICO COVID-19 Guarantee Facility, approved through Royal Decree-Law 8/2020 of 17 March 2020. 
     4In any event, given the scale of the shock, and even taking account of the economic policy measures most directly affecting non-financial corporations (such as furlough schemes and tax deferrals), different simulation exercises performed by the Banco de España3 suggest that the percentage of firms with liquidity needs in the Q2-Q4 period will rise by nearly 10 percentage points (pp), to stand at 70%, as a result of the pandemic. In terms of size, the percentage of firms with liquidity needs is higher among large corporations; by sector, it is higher in leisure and tourism activities. Nearly 90% of these needs are expected to derive from the maturity of past financial obligations, and close to 50% could be covered using liquid assets and undrawn amounts on the credit lines held before the crisis.  The information on bank lending shows firms resorting to this source of financing to cover a large portion of these liquidity requirements. Specifically, after shrinking by 1.1% year-on-year in February, the outstanding balance of bank financing granted to Spanish non-financial corporations rose by 7.2% in July. Analyses by the Banco de España suggest that the ICO's guarantee facility is, in particular, facilitating the financing both of firms facing greater difficulty gaining access to credit and of small enterprises, which have generally been more affected by the impact of the health crisis and have a greater risk profile. Thanks to the guarantees, SMEs have been able to finance themselves in recent months under more favourable conditions in terms of the interest rate, the amount of credit and, above all, the maturity of the operation, which on average has stood at close to five years. On the latest data available, this programme has provided guarantees of nearly €75 billion (of the €100 billion initially envisaged) on loans to over half a million firms, representing total financing of close to €99 billion.  The role of lending to companies in the current crisis is thus proving to be of great importance. It is contributing to reducing the risk of bankruptcy for firms that are viable but which face temporary liquidity problems, with the adverse consequences this would have in terms of job destruction and damage to the productive system, and, in sum, to the robustness and momentum of the economic recovery.  Looking to the coming months, it is estimated that, overall, the public guarantee programme (amounting to €140 billion following the latest increase) could cover around 75% of the financing needs mentioned above. The remaining amount would have to be financed by companies drawing down on their liquid assets, using the undrawn amount on the credit lines they have been granted or resorting to new debt without public guarantee.  The findings of the latest Bank Lending Survey (for Q2) anticipate the possibility of a tightening of credit standards for European firms in Q3 this year. Should this be confirmed, besides the need for monetary policy to maintain a prolonged, very accommodative stance and for the selective extension of certain ERTE support measures at the national level, an expansion of the support measures for the financing of firms would be advisable, in order to sustain the recovery. In any event, in this second phase of the economic policy response, credit support mechanisms should focus on prioritising access to these funds for firms with                                                                                               3 See Banco de España (2020), Annual Report 2019, Box 4.3, “Developments in bank finance for productive activities in the context of the COVID-19 crisis”, and R. Blanco, S. Mayordomo, Á. Menéndez and M. Mulino (2020), Spanish non-financial corporations’ liquidity needs and solvency after the COVID-19 shock, Occasional Paper No 2020, Banco de España. 
     5sound viability prospects, with a view to providing for the necessary cross-firm and cross-sector reallocation of productive resources.   Also, it should be acknowledged that the number of financially vulnerable firms will rise significantly as a result of COVID-19. According to analyses by the Banco de España, this increase will be more marked in the SME segment and among firms pursuing activities in the sectors most exposed to COVID-19. An initial factor to be taken into account when assessing the impact of the COVID-19 crisis on the corporate sector’s solvency is the future decline in the return on firms’ assets. Drawing on available estimates, the median of this indicator for the corporate sector as a whole is expected to fall from 3% pre-COVID-19 to virtually zero in 2020, in any of the macroeconomic scenarios considered by the Banco de España. Large firms are generally expected to suffer less pronounced falls in profitability. In any event, the operating deficit generated by many firms would lead to a deterioration of their financial position, resulting in lower own funds and higher debt to finance their liquidity needs. Thus, in the aforementioned early recovery scenario, the financial position of 55% of firms (with a weight of 51% in employment terms) would worsen in 2020, while in the more adverse scenario, this proportion would rise to 58%. However, despite this strong negative impact, around 40% of firms would continue to generate an operating surplus and to make new investments without a worsening of their financial position.  In short, a significant number of firms are very likely to emerge from this crisis with higher debt levels and a diminished demand outlook, at least for some time. In this respect, it is also necessary to review the  debt relief, restructuring and insolvency processes for firms, 
     6with the aim of establishing pre-emptive, swift and simplified administrative procedures enabling them to pursue their business activity while they are still viable. Speed of resolution is paramount in these procedures so as to minimise the losses in asset value that would materialise if they were to drag on, especially in a context in which the economic policy response in the short term means that the liabilities of ailing businesses to general government will foreseeably be much higher than in previous crisis periods. The introduction of more appropriate procedures and incentives would also avoid suboptimal levels of business liquidations and destruction of the productive system that would weaken the long-term economic growth and recovery potential.  The impact on the financial situation of households As in the case of firms, after the last global financial crisis, the financial situation of households improved significantly, and mortgage lending standards were far more prudent. However, consumer lending has posted high growth rates in recent years and groups of vulnerable households have continued to exist.  In any case, this crisis is also having a significant impact on households. It has led to a reduction in the wage income of individuals who have lost their jobs or been furloughed, and in their wealth, given the adjustment to the valuation of most financial assets. Thus, social security registrations, after stripping out workers subject to furlough schemes, that is, the series which might be called “actual registrations”, is estimated to have shown a year-on-year decline of 22% at end-April, with much sharper reductions in some of the services segments hardest hit by the restrictions on movement associated with the state of alert, such as the hospitality sector. In late July, the year-on-year decline in actual registrations had eased, and stood at 9% lower than the figure observed a year earlier. 
     7From the standpoint of financial stability, the evidence available4 shows that the variables with the highest information content to explain the probability of default of households are becoming unemployed and a fall in household income. The same evidence shows that, as a result of the shock triggered by the coronavirus, consumer credit defaults can be expected to occur at an earlier stage than mortgage defaults by households, and that a deterioration in income and employment will adversely affect mortgage lending overall, with a slight time lag.  Further, there is very notable disparity in the financial situation of the households most affected by the pandemic. According to the Banco de España’s Spanish Survey of Household Finances5, the industries that have borne the brunt of the pandemic employed a higher proportion of young and female workers than other sectors, and also a higher proportion of low-wage workers. The lower wages were partly offset by the fact that the employees concerned lived with other household members who had a higher income. In terms of household wealth, 28% of workers in the social industries lived, in 2017, in households whose financial assets amounted to less than one month's income, and around 8% had bank debts whose repayments amounted to more than 40% of their gross household income. Thus, the wage income and financial position of households of workers in social industries was more fragile in 2017 than that of households whose members were employed in regular industries. However, as in the case of firms, economic policy has also played a vital role in this institutional sector to mitigate the adverse economic effects of the pandemic. Specifically, in addition to sustaining household income through furlough schemes, unemployment benefits have been increased, essential utilities have been guaranteed, assistance has been provided for rental expenses, and measures have been approved to support the self-employed whose income has plummeted. More recently, a minimum living income scheme has been designed and is currently being implemented.  In addition, a number of specific measures have been negotiated to ensure that households with financial difficulties do not fail to meet their financial obligations. These include legislative and banking sector moratoria on individuals’ mortgage and other loans, which allow individuals who meet certain requirements to delay their loan repayments for a period ranging between three months and one year.  A total of 1.3 million moratoria have been granted to date, representing an outstanding credit balance of nearly €45 billion (almost 7% of the total volume of this portfolio). The moratoria granted are concentrated in the regions most affected by the crisis, on individuals aged under 30 and over 55, self-employed persons, and loans arranged with easier credit conditions. Also noteworthy is the fact that moratoria are more common in banks with higher credit growth in the years immediately preceding the outbreak of the pandemic.  Looking ahead, the trend in employment and its distribution among households will be crucial in the coming quarters, as regards the materialisation of the financial stability risks posed by this sector. The ultimate impact will also depend on the effectiveness and continuity of the measures in place to sustain household income.                                                                                               4 See Banco de España (Spring 2020), Financial Stability Report, Box 1.2, “Build-up of household debt defaults”. 5 See P. Alvargonzález, M. Pidkuyko and E. Villanueva (2020), “The financial position of the workers most affected by the pandemic: an analysis drawing on the Spanish Survey of Household Finances”, Analytical Article, Economic Bulletin, Banco de España, 3/2020. 
     8The real estate market Allow me now to briefly describe the recent developments in the housing market against the backdrop of the crisis triggered by the pandemic.    After the very significant downscaling of housing investment following the crisis that began in 2008, which reduced its weight relative to GDP from 12% before the global financial crisis to levels close to 5% in 2019, in line with other European countries, this sector’s starting point was unquestionably less vulnerable. Moreover, the reduction in housing investment activity came about in parallel with a decline in house prices which, despite the growth observed in recent years, at end-2019 remained (in real terms) some 29% below the average nationwide levels observed in 2007. However, there was some cross-regional variation and the indicators of the overvaluation of house prices showed values close to equilibrium.6 It should also be borne in mind that the weight in mortgage lending of highly leveraged transactions has been much lower in the post-2008 period, and that the mortgage loans which survived the global financial crisis have credit conditions that can generally be considered prudent, and are closer to reaching maturity. All these developments better position this sector to withstand the current crisis. In any event, this sector is inevitably also reflecting the impact of the health crisis. Even before this shock, the housing market had entered a phase of gradual slowdown, both in terms of activity and transactions and of prices, after the marked expansion of prior years, once the adverse effects of the financial crisis had been overcome. This outlook was profoundly affected by the declaration of the state of alert due to COVID-19, with a                                                                                               6 See https://www.bde.es/f/webbde/GAP/Secciones/SalaPrensa/NotasInformativas/20/presbe2020_49en.pdf. 
     9particularly sharp slump in transactions in the second half of March and in April. In subsequent months, a gradual, albeit partial, recovery is estimated to have taken place, once the restrictions on movement had been lifted and as the house purchase process gradually began to operate as normal.  In effect, the lockdown made it much more difficult to conduct the process of buying or selling a home. Once the state of alert had been declared, the number of sales through public deeds plummeted to a record low in April, falling by approximately 70% year-on-year. In subsequent months the situation improved, although falls of 20% (compared with the previous year) were still being posted in June.  In this setting, house prices are estimated to have remained on the gradually slowing path that dates back to the end of 2018, although according to the latest available data, corresponding to June, they are still posting positive growth.  Like the economy as a whole, housing investment recorded an unprecedented downturn in 2020 Q2. According to the preliminary Quarterly National Accounts estimate, this component fell by more than 30% compared with the same period in 2019, returning to the lows recorded in the previous crisis. Indicator trends appear to anticipate an upturn in housing investment in Q3, although it is expected to remain below the pre-pandemic level, owing to the worsening outlook for households.  Over a longer horizon, the extent to which the housing market will eventually recover once the health crisis is behind us will depend on the degree of persistence of its adverse economic and financial effects.   
     10The impact on the financial sector  The banking sector The crisis triggered by the pandemic has clearly accentuated the credit, market and operational risks facing the banking sector. The improvements in the quality of the Spanish banking sector’s balance sheet and in its solvency levels in the last ten years have also clearly put it in a better position to absorb this crisis and to continue to provide the financing needed by the economy. The risks to the sector’s financial stability have been mitigated by the various economic policy measures adopted. Indeed, developments in credit, as I mentioned earlier, have differentiated this crisis from other episodes in the past. At the aggregate level, the volume of new lending and the outstanding balance of deposit institutions’ loans to the real economy have increased. This represents a notable change in trend compared with developments in bank lending in Spain since the last financial crisis.  On data to 30 July 2020, total bank credit to non-financial corporations and households grew at a year-on-year rate of 2.4%, compared with the decline of 0.3% recorded until February 2020. This change in trend is largely attributable to credit to non-financial corporations which, as I said earlier, quickened substantially following the outbreak of the pandemic. Most of the financing obtained by firms has been used to shore up their liquidity buffers to meet future borrowing needs. In fact, the growth rate of firms’ bank deposits increased from slightly below 4% in February to 13% in June. By contrast, lending to households fell at a rate of 1.8% in June, whereas it was virtually flat in February. Credit for house purchase posted a year-on-year fall of 2.7%, declining almost 1 pp more than in February. The year-on-year growth rate of consumer credit, which stood at 15% in February, fell as low as 2.5% in May. In June it grew by 2.3%, owing especially to drawdowns of credit facilities, since new lending continued to move on a downward path.  However, in the coming months we will inevitably witness a deterioration in the credit quality of banks’ balance sheets, as a result of the sharp contraction in the income of non-financial corporations and households over recent months. Indeed, this deterioration is expected to intensify when the moratoria end or the grace period on guaranteed loans expires.  The volume of NPLs in the private non-financial sector continued to fall at a year-on-year rate of 11% in June, although this was 8 pp less than the decline in February. The NPLs in banks’ business in Spain increased by 2% between March and June this year, with no major differences between firms and households. Although the increase in NPLs traditionally lags behind the onset of recessions, this increase is very contained considering the scale of the fall in GDP. Undoubtedly, the measures implemented, particularly guarantee schemes for firms and payment holidays for individuals, are significantly reducing the immediate rise in newly classified NPLs. Reclassifications of NPLs which in recent years significantly reduced the NPL ratio, have also fallen, owing to less activity in the impaired assets market.  Looking ahead, the uncertainty about the potential rise in the NPL ratio is notable since this crisis is on an unprecedented scale and is deeper than that envisaged in the adverse macroeconomic scenarios applied in the stress testing of the financial system in recent 
     11years. The timing is also very different since in this episode, if current macroeconomic forecasts are confirmed, the adjustment to GDP would be concentrated in the first year of the shock (2020), to be followed by a recovery whose strength is still uncertain. In addition, the impact will hinge on the size and duration of the measures adopted, which will influence their effectiveness.  In any event, the increase in NPLs is expected to be higher among smaller firms operating in sectors involving greater social interaction; and, in the case of households, in exposures not secured by mortgages. Accordingly, banks are already recording earlier part of the provisions that they might have to set aside in the future. Furthermore, my previous remarks about the aggregate situation of the system mask considerable diversity. This is mainly because the starting positions of the various institutions, in terms of own funds and credit quality, are already different. Likewise, some segments of households and non-financial corporations are also still in highly fragile financial situations. For example, smaller firms are more vulnerable to a scenario of falling revenues. But, additionally, in a crisis like this, as I have mentioned earlier, the deterioration of banks’ solvency is expected to hinge on their degree of exposure to the various regions and sectors which are being affected differently by the pandemic.   In any event, as in the case of households and non-financial corporations, the public support measures implemented in recent months will help to mitigate the effects on financial stability. In particular, the government loan guarantee scheme and the various measures adopted by the ECB will contribute to smoothing the impact on banks’ solvency. The restrictions on the payment of dividends by banks also contribute significantly to this objective. And, lastly the moratoria will be useful so that the classification of loans as non-performing is eased and distributed over time.  Nevertheless, the impact of the COVID-19 crisis on financial institutions’ profitability is already clear. The banking industry’s already narrow profit margins of recent years –  profitability actually stood below the cost of capital in the main European banking systems – were squeezed even further by the outbreak of COVID-19 and the need to record higher provisions to cover adverse developments in banking. Specifically, data from the first half of 2020 showed that listed Spanish banks had consolidated net losses of €10.5 billion, compared with profits of a similar order of magnitude in the same period in 2019. Higher provisioning and, especially, the non-recurring adjustment to goodwill, both as a result of the expected downturn in economic conditions on account of the pandemic, were the main causes of lower profits. The losses were concentrated at the two banks with the largest international presence but profits decreased by two thirds at the other banks. In any event, banks’ recurring business has only been affected modestly to date and this is being offset partly by an adjustment to operating expenses and, consequently, they continue to gain in efficiency.  
     12 Therefore, the price-to-book (P/B) ratio — which compares listed banks’ market capitalisation and their book value — contracted notably in Spain, as in other European countries, by declining to levels of around 0.4, although it subsequently recovered somewhat.   
     13 One way of illustrating the risks to financial stability posed by the current episode is through simulation exercises which assess prospectively banks’ resilience to adverse macroeconomic scenarios. Accordingly, the ECB conducted a so-called “vulnerability” analysis – to underline their limitations compared with the usual stress tests – in order to measure European banks’ resilience to the strains triggered by the coronavirus. The results published last July show some of the risks identified.7 Specifically, based on these results, the euro area banking sector overall is positioned to withstand pandemic-induced stress, although the reduction in banks’ solvency under the most adverse macroeconomic scenarios would be significant. Furthermore, the results of this exercise show significant heterogeneity across banks. In particular, according to the ECB’s estimations, the central scenario8 depletes banks’ capital (CET1) ratio by approximately 1.9 pp to 12.6% and the severe scenario by 5.7 pp to 8.8% in 2022. Impaired credit exposures and market risk losses are the key drivers of capital consumption. In any event, in view of the uncertainty and the complex nature of this crisis, and despite the wide range of measures already implemented, the need to develop certain measures further or to address new ones to avoid potential financial instability cannot be ruled out. As I have already said on previous occasions,9 I think our shared aim should be to prevent the current crisis from being accompanied by a widespread tightening of financing conditions or from seriously damaging our financial system. Therefore the authorities must remain vigilant and head off the risks to financial stability stemming from this crisis and we must be ready to provide a forceful, pan-European response should they materialise. Looking ahead, the low profitability of banks is one of the main challenges facing the banking sector in Europe and Spain. Everything points to the very low or even negative interest rate scenario continuing for even longer and, in this environment, banks may find it increasingly difficult to obtain returns without incurring excessive risk. Additionally, they will also have to face competition from potential competitors in the credit market. These companies – not necessarily financial in origin – which extensively harness information about their customers using new technologies, may drastically alter the operating environment of traditional banks. The banks’ strategy faced with these challenges must inevitably involve investing heavily in this type of technology to make the most of their data. This, also, will enable them to refocus their lending business on higher-margin segments while maintaining the risk they have assumed within reasonable limits. They should also continue to strive to make efficiency                                                                                               7 “Euro area banking sector resilient to stress caused by coronavirus, ECB analysis shows”, ECB press release of 28 July 2020. 8 The benchmark central scenario envisages an increase in infections over the next few quarters and the application of the corresponding containment measures until a medical solution is available; based on these assumptions euro area real GDP is projected to decline by 8.7% in 2020 and rebound by 5.2% in 2021 and by 3.3% in 2022. Under the adverse scenario, which envisages a vigorous rise in infections and stricter containment measures, real GDP would decline by 12.6% in 2020 and would grow by 3.3% in 2021 and by 3.8% in 2022. 9 See P. Hernández de Cos (2020). Appearance before the Economic Affairs and Digital Transformation Committee (Congress of Deputies) on 18 May 2020. and Appearance before the Parliamentary Committee for the Social and Economic Reconstruction of Spain after COVID-19 (Congress of Deputies) on 23 June 2020  
     14gains and, once more, will have to make more intensive use of new technologies to continue to cut their operating costs. Furthermore, there is room for some consolidation in the sector which will contribute to making banks and the system, as a whole, more resilient. Non-bank financial sector  Apart from its effect on the banking sector, this crisis is also having a considerable impact on the valuation of many financial assets, and on their volatility. Initially, there was a major stock market correction and a sharp increase in equity and bond volatility. Subsequently, following the reaction of global monetary and fiscal policies, stock markets began to recover and volatilities to decline. In fact, in both the United States and the euro area, some market valuation measures, such as P/E ratios, have returned to historical highs, potentially indicating a certain disconnect between the recent rapid and significant recovery in financial markets and the more moderate behaviour of macroeconomic data and the concerns over corporate sector weakness.  In this respect, despite the slowdown in recent months in the rate of credit rating downgrades, following the sharp increase between March and May, the spreads on high-yield corporate debt (i.e. with a rating below BBB) ceased to rise in June in Europe and in the United States, and thus, in contrast to those on investment-grade corporate debt (BBB or higher rating), have remained below their pre-crisis levels. This deterioration in corporate credit quality is a further element of vulnerability for financial stability. Past experience shows that extensive rating downgrades in the corporate sector can generate adverse second-round effects that exacerbate the crisis. The mechanism is as follows: since investment and pension funds, along with other institutional holders of corporate debt instruments, usually have restrictions in their mandates on their holdings of 
     15non-investment-grade assets, if many of these securities become high-yield they have to be sold by these investors, leading to a further decline in value and thus greater losses for all holders.  The importance of this vulnerability is illustrated by a recent analysis conducted by the ESRB.10 Specifically, it was estimated that, in Europe, almost half of corporate bonds with a BBB rating are held by investment funds, around a third by insurance companies, almost a quarter by credit institutions and the rest by pension funds. Investment funds and insurance companies are thus precisely the institutional investors that hold most of the BBB-rated corporate debt, a third of which is associated with sectors considered as sensitive to COVID-19. A large-scale downgrading of this debt, to below investment-grade status, would entail considerable potential losses for the financial system of the European Union (EU) as a whole, a significant part of which would correspond to indirect losses attributable to the forced selling mentioned above.  The role of rating agencies in this process is fundamental. When making their assessments, these institutions need to take into account the long-term outlook for the corporation concerned and avoid excessively pro-cyclical behaviour. Indeed, this time round, rating agencies appear to have been more cautious than in the global financial crisis and, to date, phenomena comparable to those seen in the past have not occurred. In any event, the results of this exercise serve to show the systemic importance of this vulnerability and the need to be prepared to provide a sufficient, internationally coordinated response, depending on how the pandemic develops at international level. The impact on general government                                                                                               10 A system-wide scenario analysis of large-scale corporate bond downgrades, ESRB Technical Note, 23 July 2020. 
     16 During the current crisis, the activation of automatic fiscal stabilisers associated with lower tax receipts and increased cyclical expenditure (for instance, on unemployment benefit), along with the effect of the discretionary measures adopted by the authorities to mitigate the impact of the crisis, is leading to very significant increases in budget deficits and public debt in all countries. Initially, there were also tensions in European public debt markets, which led to a sharp rise in sovereign spreads. However, the decisions of the ECB and the reiteration by its Governing Council of the commitment to do everything necessary to support all citizens of the euro area through this extremely challenging time, ensuring that its monetary policy is transmitted to all parts of the economy and to every country, have alleviated these tensions. Likewise, the response of the European Union, which has resolved to make significant public funds available to Member States with which to mitigate the impact of the crisis and reactivate their economies, has also been crucial. In the case of Spain, the pandemic has struck the economy at a time when the general government accounts still displayed certain elements of vulnerability. In particular, despite uninterrupted robust growth in recent years, at the end of 2019 the public sector structural deficit stood above 3% of GDP and the public debt ratio above 95% of GDP. Moreover, according to Banco de España projections, in the next few years the budget deficit may exceed 10%, while the public debt-to-GDP ratio may stand at around 120%. Following its initial increase, ECB and European monetary policy decisions have kept the risk premium well contained in recent months. However, looking ahead, persistently high levels of public debt would reduce the scope for countercyclical fiscal measures in response to adverse macroeconomic shocks and might even limit the economy’s growth capacity; in any case, they would expose the Spanish economy to a situation of chronic vulnerability to changes in investor sentiment on the financial markets.  For all these reasons, although the response to the health crisis should be accompanied in the short term by decisive fiscal measures to reduce its impact, an overall growth strategy with a medium-term horizon needs to be implemented. This should include the design of a fiscal consolidation programme, to be applied as and when the worst effects of the crisis are over and the recovery has firmed.  Conclusions The COVID-19 pandemic is having an unprecedented negative macroeconomic impact which has, in turn, led to an increase in financial stability risks. The actions of the national and supranational economic authorities (fiscal, monetary and supervisory) have reduced these risks, but they have not been completely eliminated.  We are currently experiencing a gradual recovery that is, however, subject to a high degree of uncertainty and remains incomplete and uneven. The economic policy response needs to be adapted to the specific requirements of this new phase. Specifically, on the ECB’s Governing Council we have made it clear that a high degree of monetary accommodation is needed to support the recovery, avoid financial fragmentation 
     17and safeguard our price stability objective. In this respect, if necessary, we are prepared to adjust all our instruments. In the banking sphere, the crisis will have a significant impact on the quality of loan portfolios, the magnitude of which will depend on how serious it ultimately proves to be, as the recently published ECB vulnerability exercise has shown. This impact will vary from one institution to another, according to the starting position of each one and their exposure to the sectors and agents most affected by the crisis. In these circumstances, we need to avoid serious damage to the stability of the financial system, as this would make the crisis deeper and longer. Accordingly, we need to step up the surveillance of risks to financial stability and be prepared to respond forcefully, at European level, in the event that any materialise. In addition, banks must address their medium-term challenges decisively, including notably their low profitability, both in Spain and across Europe. At national level, some of the measures already applied need to be extended and regularly recalibrated. Currently, these need to be focused on the most severely affected groups of households and sectors, promoting the necessary structural adjustment, and to be adapted to the rate at which the recovery is taking place. In the corporate sphere, many companies will emerge from this crisis with higher levels of debt, and this may hamper the recovery and be a source of vulnerability. Strategies therefore need to be implemented to promote corporate financial restructuring. One of the main challenges is to avoid funds remaining at companies with no prospect of viability in the post-pandemic scenario. Likewise, the European recovery fund resources should be used to support sustainable restructuring and modernisation of the productive sector. At the same time, persistently high public debt (as will inevitably be generated by this crisis) would reduce the scope for action in response to future adverse shocks, expose the economy to a situation of chronic vulnerability and limit its growth capacity. In this situation, we should accept that the necessary short-term fiscal expansion must be accompanied by an ambitious reform agenda to address the structural challenges facing the Spanish economy and a fiscal consolidation programme, to be implemented as soon as the recovery firms. Without doubt, further analysis and experience will be required before we can draw all the lessons from this crisis. However, we should be aware, in any event, of the unprecedented scale of the collective challenge that we as a society face to return to a path of prosperity and opportunities for all. Hence, once again, I advocate broad-based agreements to shape the urgent, ambitious and comprehensive growth strategy that Spain currently needs. The financial system can and should make a significant contribution in this regard. Thank you for your attention.   
            I am grateful to Stefania Spiga for her help in writing these remarks, and to Amber Evans, Tom Horn,  Al Hughes and Alieda Moore for their input and guidance.   All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice 1      From LIBOR to SONIA:  a bridge to the future    Remarks given by Andrew Hauser, Executive Director, Markets  At the ‘Is Your Business Prepared for LIBOR?’ webinar 18 September 2020                
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice 2  2   Thank you Phil.  It’s great to be with you, and it’s great to have such a fantastic line up to discuss this vital issue for every company in the UK. We’re here today to talk about what it will take to get your business ready to transition away from LIBOR. But I want to start somewhere different.  I want to start with a bridge:  Hammersmith Bridge in London, to be precise.  It’s been around forever.  People love it:  it can carry over 20,000 vehicles a day.  And to the naked eye, it seems in the prime of health:  beautiful to look at, safe as houses?  Well no, actually:  it’s completely unsafe.  Below that shining metalwork, there are big and growing cracks – and sooner or later, if nothing is done, someone driving over it is going to fall headfirst into the Thames.   So the local council has closed the bridge – it had no choice.  But the disruption has been huge.  Journeys that used to take a few minutes can now take hours.  There are traffic jams everywhere.  And protests have become so vocal that the secretary of state for transport has responded by setting up a dedicated task force. LIBOR’s a bit like that bridge.  It’s been around since the 1960s.  Every company has got to know it inside out, and built it into their daily routines.  And it’s popular – very popular:  almost 400 trillion dollars of financial instruments, across every part of the global economy, are tied to LIBOR in some way. But just like that bridge, it isn’t safe.  Structural change in the financial markets mean that the trading that used to underpin LIBOR – term unsecured lending between banks – has virtually disappeared.  In its place lies little more than informed guesswork.  And that just isn’t a viable long-term basis for the debt and financial instruments on which all your businesses rely.  Sooner or later, a benchmark based on such shaky foundations will collapse.  Just like Hammersmith Bridge.  Only it won’t be a few thousand disadvantaged families, it could be the entire global financial system that suffers, with unimaginable consequences. We can’t let that happen.  And that’s why, for the past six years, we’ve been doing two things: - First, we’ve been constructing a new bridge.  For sterling borrowers, that bridge is built on the foundations of SONIA – the Sterling Overnight Index Average, produced every day by us at the Bank of England and based – unlike LIBOR – at around 60 billion pounds of real, daily transactions1; - And, second, while that work has been underway, we’ve shored up the old LIBOR bridge, through the FCA’s agreement with LIBOR panel banks to continue providing submissions to the benchmark. But those repairs were only ever temporary.  The FCA can’t replace those markets that used to underpin LIBOR submissions:  they are gone forever.  And the FCA’s agreement with the panel banks runs out at the end of 2021.  From 2022, therefore, the availability of LIBOR cannot be guaranteed.  Something that is unsafe today will become lethal at the end of next year.                                                         1 The Sterling Overnight Index Average (SONIA) is administered by the Bank and reflects the average of the interest rates that banks pay to borrow sterling overnight from other financial institutions See www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/sonia-benchmark. 
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice 3  3   Avoiding that outcome is what we’re here today to discuss.  But before we dive into the detail I want to leave you with three key messages: - First, LIBOR transition affects every company that borrows in sterling.  You cannot ignore it, or hope that it goes away:  you need to act well before the end of 2021. - But, second, there is time if you start now.  That new bridge I mentioned a moment ago is up and running.  By the end of this month, all lenders should be ready to offer you products linked to SONIA or another non-LIBOR rate.  Six or twelve months ago, that wasn’t universally true.  Now it is.  But don’t just take my word for that.  Ask National Express, which took out one of the first SONIA-linked loans.2  Ask Riverside Group, a housing association, which secured a SONIA credit facility during the height of the Covid crisis in early April.3  Or ask GlaxoSmithKline, which concluded a multi-currency refinanced credit facility linked to both SONIA and its US equivalent SOFR.4   - Moving away from LIBOR won’t always be easy.  But that’s where I come to my third message:  which is that you are not in this on your own:  for those needing to transition, there is help, and lots of it.  The first port of call for most firms should be your own bank, to begin understanding how SONIA can work for your business.  But help is also available from many other sources: o The industry wide Risk Free Rate Working Group has produced educational videos and helpful short guides.  These are available on the Bank of England5 and FCA websites and will be sent to everyone attending today’s webinar.   o The Working Group will also be taking forward a programme of engagement with your sector into the end of this year, to help you with transition.  Further details will be given on their LinkedIn page.   o You can find help from the organisations co-sponsoring this event, the Association of Corporate Treasurers and the Confederation of British Industry.  Both have a wealth of knowledge and experience with transition – as do UK Finance.   o And, if you don’t see what you need, please ask on this session today or later, via your bank, the Working Group, the ACT, the CBI or UK Finance.   We are acutely aware this is a difficult time for many businesses, facing an uncertain future in the midst of the Coronavirus epidemic.  But it’s just not safe to keep relying on Libor.  And it’s not good for your business                                                       2 https://www.rbs.com/rbs/news/2019/07/natwest-completes-markets-first-sonia-loan-for-national-express.html 3 https://www.riverside.org.uk/riverside-breaks-new-ground-with-sector-first-100m-sonia-revolving-loan-facility/ 4 https://www.allenovery.com/en-gb/global/news-and-insights/news/ao-advises-hsbc-bank-as-coordinator-on-new-risk-free-rate-loan-facilities-for-glaxosmithkline-plc 5 The Working Group of Sterling Risk-Free Reference Rates website is available at: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/transition-to-sterling-risk-free-rates-from-libor 
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice 4  4   either.  A benchmark based on guesswork can’t be relied upon to behave in your interests at times of stress.  We saw a vivid illustration of just that in March, when the Bank of England and the Federal Reserve both cut official interest rates sharply, but LIBOR rates actually rose – at a time when transactions underpinning those measures were near-zero. It really is time to get off that failing bridge before it closes for good.  We’re here to help, and I look forward to our discussions here this morning.    
SPEECH Jointly shaping Europe’s tomorrow Introductory remarks by Christine Lagarde, President of the ECB, at the Franco-German Parliamentary Assembly, 21 September 2020Frankfurt am Main, 21 September 2020Dear President Schäuble, Dear President Ferrand,Honourable Members of the Franco-German Assembly, I would like to thank you very warmly for inviting me to join you today.As President of the European Central Bank and a French citizen living and working in Germany, it is an honour to speak at this historic forum. This parliamentary assembly is an embodiment of the special relationship between our two countries and their commitment to European integration. I find it essential that the ECB constantly engages in two-way communication, especially with citizens’ representatives. We need to make sure that the ECB’s voice is heard by the people and that the people’s voice is heard by the ECB. This is why events like today’s are so important for me. Our regular interlocutor is the European Parliament, to whom we are accountable under the Treaty for our monetary policy tasks. Transnational settings like this one give us a further chance to look past nation-specific concerns as we discuss Europe’s future. The coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic is a crisis of unprecedented magnitude. Many of you will recognise the famous words of Jean Monnet, one of the founding fathers of the European project, who said: “Europe will be forged in crises and will be the sum of the solutions adopted for those crises”[1]. This pandemic has proven him right once more. Undoubtedly, Europe has been strengthened during this crisis. But Europe now has the opportunity to show that it can be more than the sum of the solutions adopted in this crisis. Once again, Monnet’s words offer inspiration: “Europe itself is only a step towards the forms of organisation of the world of tomorrow”.[2]With these words in mind, we must seize this invaluable opportunity to strengthen our Union. We must shape the recovery from this crisis in such a way that our economies are fit for the world of tomorrow. The unique strength of the European projectThe pandemic and the measures to contain the spread of the virus have caused a contraction in euro area economic activity that is unprecedented in peacetime.[3]While incoming data suggest that we will see a strong rebound during the third quarter[4], the strength of the recovery remains very uncertain, as well as uneven and incomplete. It continues to be highly dependent on the future evolution of the pandemic and the success of containment policies. 
One major reason why we can expect a rebound in activity in the second half of the year is because, when faced with the largest economic shock since the Second World War, Europe and its leaders showed the unique strength of the European project: by acting together, we can achieve more.The ECB has played its part in this collective effort in the face of an unprecedented crisis. The nature of the pandemic shock called for an extraordinary monetary policy response. We launched the pandemic emergency purchase programme (PEPP) to help stabilise financial markets and ease our monetary policy stance considerably. The PEPP is temporary, targeted and proportionate. It addresses the specific shock at hand, and aims to repair the economic damage and the resulting downward pressures on inflation wrought by the pandemic. In addition, it was also vital that we limited the risk of a credit crunch. So we substantially eased the conditions under which banks can obtain liquidity under our targeted longer-term refinancing operations. Banks can now borrow from the ECB at interest rates which can reach -1%, under the condition that they are lending to the real economy. Six months after we introduced our measures, our policy package has stabilised markets, protected the supply of credit and supported the recovery. This, in turn, should support the return of inflation towards our medium-term objective and safeguard price stability. At the same time, the uncertainty of the current environment requires a very careful assessment of the incoming information, including developments in the exchange rate, with regard to its implications for the medium-term inflation outlook. The Governing Council continues to stand ready to adjust all of its instruments, as appropriate, to ensure that inflation moves towards its aim in a sustained manner, in line with its commitment to symmetry.When you look at the past six months, the ECB has not been the only game in town. Our measures have been complemented by forceful fiscal responses at both national and European levels. This has been a critically important factor in alleviating the impact of the pandemic on the labour market and on banks’ lending. We judge that the economy still needs that support if the recovery is to continue and strengthen further.Ambitious fiscal measures by national governments were complemented by a €540 billion European safety net. And with the Next Generation EU fund, Europe took a decisive step forwards as the crisis evolved. For the first time, a common budgetary instrument at European level can be used to complement fiscal stabilisers at national level, even if it is currently only temporary. As a result, we now have an aggregate policy mix in which fiscal and monetary policy reinforce each other in supporting the recovery, and thus underpin medium-term price stability. The case for jointly shaping Europe’s futureWe must now carry this positive momentum forwards. It is time for Europe to move beyond the initial priority of containing the immediate impact of the crisis and shape a common vision for its future.The pandemic has the potential to accelerate trends that were already emerging before the crisis; trends that will lead to structural changes in the global economy. In a world where technological change and geopolitical tensions are transforming the geography of value chains, we should make full use of the size and diversity of the European economy.If we strengthen Economic and Monetary Union and deepen the Single Market, we do not only benefit all Europeans by improving the way we produce, distribute and consume. We also increase our autonomy and ensure that Europe is better protected in the world of tomorrow. As legislators, you have a crucial role to play in designing policies that can revitalise our economies. Digitalisation is a case in point. We need to fully reap the potential gains from digital technologies and, at the same time, make sure labour markets remain inclusive. If we don’t, we risk creating a new divide, and we can already see gaps opening up when we look at differences in wages, education levels and gender.[5]By implementing the right set of national and European policies, we will achieve more together than we can alone. At national level, we need to make the necessary changes to labour, product and financial market regulations, and invest in education to reduce digital exclusion. At European level, this should be 
complemented by accelerating progress towards the Digital Single Market to help deliver economies of scale for digital firms, while addressing key concerns around cybersecurity and data protection. In a more digital economy, we also need to ensure the strength and autonomy of European payment systems.[6]The Eurosystem is actively pursuing initiatives to achieve this. We are also exploring the benefits, risks and operational challenges of introducing a digital euro. A digital euro could be a complement to, not a substitute for, cash; it could provide an alternative to private digital currencies and ensure that sovereign money remains at the core of European payment systems.The pandemic has also clearly refocused people’s attention on the environment.[7]We cannot miss this opportunity to reduce and prevent climate risks and finance the necessary green transition. All of the available evidence shows that climate-related risks are real and have major consequences for our economy. A disorderly transition to a low-carbon economy could pose systemically relevant risks.[8]Given how interconnected our financial sector is, we need to address these risks together.The transition to a carbon-neutral economy will also provide new opportunities for growth, which can be unlocked by ambitious investment programmes. The EU will need up to €470 billion of additional investment every year to reach its current climate and environmental policy goals.[9]Next Generation EU will strengthen the role of public budgets in green infrastructure financing. At the same time, the transition can only be successful if the private sector contributes as well. The financial system should be a catalyst for this change. Policymakers should thus create the necessary conditions for the financial sector to do what it does best: allocate capital where it is most needed. The renewed sustainable finance strategy announced by the European Commission should help to ensure that externalities associated with climate change are correctly reflected in prices. At the same time, we need to remove all obstacles to the development of a cross-border market for sustainable financial products. In other words, we need to finally complete the banking union and create a genuine capital markets union. And deep and liquid capital markets will also go a long way towards strengthening the international role of the euro and bolstering Europe’s strategic autonomy.Everybody needs to be ready for the profound changes currently sweeping our economies and our societies. The ECB’s ongoing strategy review will ensure that its monetary policy strategy is fit for purpose, both today and in the future. Listening to European citizens’ expectations and better understanding their economic concerns and expectations before making decisions is an important part of this review.[10]If the right actions are taken now, this crisis can be an opportunity for us to create the conditions for more inclusive, greener and more digital growth. To come back to Jean Monnet’s words, this crisis can be an opportunity for Europe to take a step towards the forms of organisation of the world of tomorrow.Conclusion Let me conclude. Almost 60 years ago to the day – on 23 September 1960 – the Europe Bridge crossing the Rhine between Kehl and Strasbourg was inaugurated. It has become a symbol of how close our two countries have become. The success of the Franco-German “bridge” was clearly reflected in the pain caused to families, businesses and commuters by the closure of the Franco-German border at the height of the pandemic, as many of you know all too well. The challenge in front of us is not only to build “bridges” between European countries. We also need to build bridges to the future and shape a recovery that makes our economies fit for the future. But bridges need solid foundations. Europe’s future must be built on strong democratic legitimacy.Europe’s citizens must be at the centre of the debate about the Europe that we want to build as we emerge from the crisis. As their elected representatives, you, together with the European Parliament, have a crucial role to play in making their voices heard. 
I now look forward to our debate.[1]In French: “J’ai toujours pensé que l’Europe se ferait dans les crises, et qu’elle serait la somme des solutions qu’on apporterait à ces crises.” See Monnet, J. (1976), Mémoires, Fayard, Paris.[2]In French: “[la Communauté européenne] elle-même n’est qu’une étape vers les formes d’organisation du monde de demain.” See Monnet, J., ibid., p. 617.[3]Following a significant drop in the first quarter of 2020, euro area real GDP fell by 11.8% in the second quarter, resulting in a record cumulative decline of 15.1% in the first half of the year.[4]ECB staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area, September 2020.[5]Milasi, S. et al. (2020), “The potential for teleworking in Europe and the risk of a new digital divide”, VoxEU, 14 August.[6]Lagarde, C. (2020), “Payments in a digital world”, speech at the Deutsche Bundesbank online conference on banking and payments in the digital world, 10 September.[7]75% of people in 16 major countries expect their government to make environmental protection a priority when planning the post-COVID-19 recovery. See Ipsos press release (published on 5 June 2020) about the results of a survey conducted between 21 and 24 May 2020 on the Global Advisor online platform.[8]Giuzio, M. et al. (2019), “Climate change and financial stability”, Financial Stability Review, ECB, May.[9]European Commission (2020), “Identifying Europe's recovery needs”, Commission Staff Working Document, 27 May.[10]Through our ECB Listens portal, we are inviting euro area citizens, organisations and relevant stakeholders to contribute ideas and comments on the way we conduct monetary policy.European Central BankDirectorate General Communications Sonnemannstrasse 20, 60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany Tel.: +49 69 1344 7455, email: media@ecb.europa.euWebsite: www.ecb.europa.euReproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.Media contactsCopyright 2020, European Central Bank 
Carolyn Wilkins: Opening remarks - “Toward the 2021 Renewal ofthe Monetary Policy Framework”Opening remarks (delivered virtually) by Ms Carolyn A Wilkins, Senior Deputy Governor of theBank of Canada, at the Bank of Canada Workshop “Toward the 2021 Renewal of the MonetaryPolicy Framework”, Ottawa, Ontario, 26 August 2020.*   *   *Bonjour tout le monde, et bienvenue à notre colloque virtuel. Thank you all for joining ourworkshop on the renewal of the Bank of Canada’s monetary policy framework in 2021.Renewal is just around the corner—hard to believe. Bank researchers have made a lot ofprogress since we kicked off our workplan in 2018. That seems like a thousand years ago giventhe current health and economic context. At that time, in a speech at McGill’s Max Bell School ofPublic Policy, I laid out the main challenges confronting us as we did our work. We are lookingforward to the conference they will host on this topic in September.One challenge I laid out in that speech has become crystal clear today: central banks are likely torun out of conventional firepower if we see an economic downturn in a low-interest-rate world.Another challenge is that long periods of low interest rates encourage investors to take on riskthat may be excessive. We see that now with high levels of indebtedness, not only in Canada,but around the world. Global debt-to-GDP is nearly 350 percent—much higher than at the time ofthe global financial crisis.These challenges led us to focus our research on three questions:First: Can we articulate another framework that will do a better job than the inflation-targetingframework that’s been in place for over 25 years? To answer this, we are running a horse raceamong alternative frameworks for monetary policy. These include average inflation targeting,price-level targeting, an employment-inflation dual mandate and nominal GDP growth and leveltargeting. Another possibility is to raise the inflation target.We are evaluating these frameworks against a clear set of criteria. Of course, we are looking tosee how well they can achieve stability in the economy and in prices so that businesses andfamilies can make decisions with more confidence. We’re considering the implications foraccountability, communications and credibility. We’re also looking at more novel criteria: howeach framework impacts the distribution of income and wealth, and how robust the frameworksare in good economic times and bad. You’ll hear more about the results of the horse race later.Second: How can the Bank of Canada’s tool kit support whatever monetary policy framework weend up choosing? To answer this question, we are studying how the tools the Bank recentlyintroduced have impacted both financial markets and the real economy. I can say that in 2018, Iwould not have foreseen that we would have deployed so many of our tools in response to aglobal pandemic. I am grateful, however, that the advance legwork staff did meant we were readyto respond quickly.Finally: How can other public policies work together with monetary policy to support sustainablegrowth and price stability? Like other central banks, we are closely following research thatexamines how monetary policy interacts with fiscal and other public policies. You haveundoubtedly noticed that we have a live experiment in motion on how monetary and fiscal policycan complement one another during a crisis.  The purpose of today’s workshop is to discuss what we have learned so far from theconsiderable research produced by our staff and to gather your views on these researchquestions. Our discussion with you is just one of several ways we’re seeking feedback: earlier 1 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
this week we launched an online public consultation to gather Canadians’ views on the Bank’sapproach to monetary policy.This input from the public, along with consultations held with diverse groups representingconsumers, labour, businesses, Indigenous communities, civil society and academics, willinform the Bank’s thinking on the best monetary policy framework for Canada. The plan is topublish a report in the coming months summarizing what we’ve heard.Today, we want to hear your comments and advice so we can make sure the evidence we bringto bear on the final decisions is robust and thorough.Before we begin the day, I’d like to reflect on early impressions of how well our current monetarypolicy framework has served us during the pandemic.First, the fact that we have a clear and simple framework is golden. We have a clear target—2percent inflation—which means businesses and families know what we aim to achieve with ouractions. We know that central banks must be transparent, especially in times of crisis. Ourinflation target of 2 percent is defined in terms of the annual consumer price index (CPI) inflationrate, so it’s simple to see if we’ve done our job well or not.Second, our framework is flexible in terms of how fast we aim to return inflation to target. Thisflexibility means that we can also consider how well the job market is doing when we aredetermining how quickly to achieve our inflation target. It’s also useful in circumstances wherereturning inflation to target more slowly could help support financial stability.Third, I’m struck by how far we’ve come in our understanding of the limits of monetary policy tosolving all problems. This has increased the focus on how fiscal policy should contribute tostimulating growth and on how structural policies increase long-term economic prosperity forCanada. It has also underlined the role of macroprudential policies in helping to avoid the buildupof financial vulnerabilities when interest rates are low. Such policies include mortgage stresstests and other regulations to support sound underwriting practices.Let me be clear, monetary policy is ill-equipped to deal with sector-specific issues. We need totake them into account in our monetary policy decisions, but our focus must be on the macroeconomy to support sustainable growth and price stability. In the current context, coming out ofsuch a severe hit to jobs and economic activity, the Bank must keep its eye on the ball.Fortunately, there are many other policies that are well suited to deal with sector-specific issues.All of this together highlights the challenges of policy coordination and the importance of centralbank independence. The Bank of Canada, along with other central banks, is deploying an array ofmonetary policy tools to support the economy and financial system in response to the pandemic.The Bank has been clear that our efforts, including quantitative easing, are in support of ourmonetary policy objective—and ultimately the economic and financial well-being of Canadians.That said, there is one other area where I think we need to dig in more. That is the measurementof our target—the CPI. Last year during our consultations, we heard loud and clear that themeasure of inflation needed to be considered. Many people feel that inflation is higher thanreported. That’s why we started working with Statistics Canada last year to look for ways toimprove the CPI. Deputy Governor Schembri spoke about this yesterday at the CanadianAssociation for Business Economics.This work continues now at an accelerated pace, because COVID-19 has only exacerbated thisperception of higher inflation. Prices that are falling, like those around travel, are not relevant tomost people; but the prices that are rising, like the cost of food, are those we encounter everyweek. The price of meat has risen by more than 4 percent since February—before the pandemichit Canada. That doesn’t feel like low inflation to me or to many families, yet measured inflation is 2 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
close to zero when you consider the full basket of goods and services.It’s critical that we measure inflation as accurately as possible so Canadians have confidence inour target; and we must address public perceptions in our analysis and communications.In the morning session, we will compare monetary policy frameworks and provide an update onthe horse race. It’s a big topic, so we’ve split the session into two parts.First, Rhys Mendes will provide an overview of how our side-by-side assessment hasprogressed. So far, we’ve identified some of the strengths and weaknesses of the differentframeworks. But at this point, no single framework dominates on all margins.After a break, we welcome a discussion of the horse race. Joseph Gagnon from the PetersonInstitute for International Economics, Pierre Fortin from the Université du Québec à Montréal andStephanie Schmitt-Grohé from Columbia University will lead.At lunch, we’ll watch a video in which Deputy Governor Schembri explores the recent Bank ofCanada staff discussion paper, “Strengthening Inflation Targeting: Review and RenewalProcesses in Canada and Other Advanced Jurisdictions.”Then we’ll break into small groups to discuss the results of the horse race.In the afternoon, Session 2 will examine policy coordination in a time of crisis. Césaire Meh willchair this one, with discussions by Ricardo Reis of the London School of Economics, and MartyEichenbaum of Northwestern University.Finally, we’ll close with a discussion of those alternative tools I mentioned and lessons from theCOVID-19 crisis. Leading the discussion will be Ed Devlin, formerly of PIMCO, Annette Vissing-Jørgensen from the Haas School of Business at Berkeley and Anil Kashyap from the Universityof Chicago Booth School of Business.Seeing unconventional monetary policy tools in action during COVID-19 has put renewed focuson how they’re impacting both asset prices and decisions on borrowing and lending.We should, of course, also discuss the side effects we are most concerned about and exploreways we can mitigate these without reducing the effectiveness of the tools.We are looking forward to your feedback today—it will inform and influence our next steps.I will return to this virtual stage at the end of the day to sum up the takeaways from our work here.Let’s start the conversation. I’m expecting a lively and constructive discussion. 3 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
I would like to thank Karyne Charbonneau, Erik Ens and  Corinne Luu for their help in preparing this speech.  Not for publication before September 10, 2020 12:30 Eastern Time      Remarks by Tiff Macklem Governor of the Bank of Canada The Canadian Chamber of Commerce Ottawa, Ontario  September 10, 2020 (via webcast)    Economic progress report:  a very uneven recovery  Introduction Thank you for the kind introduction. I am pleased to connect with you virtually to discuss our interest rate decision yesterday and some of the challenges facing Canada during the current economic recovery. Tomorrow marks six months since COVID-19 was declared a global pandemic. Since then, this disease has taken a huge toll on lives and livelihoods. In the first half of 2020, it caused the biggest global downturn since the Great Depression. In Canada, the economy saw the sharpest drop on record in the second quarter. Gross domestic product fell about 13 percent in the first half of the year. At the low point in April, about 3 million Canadians were out of work, and millions more were working reduced hours. This recession has been exceptionally severe. It is also unusual in how unevenly it is affecting businesses and people. Business closures and job losses have been less severe in sectors that could quickly adapt to remote work and online transactions. In contrast, sectors that require close contact—and the people who work in them—have been hit hardest. These are mostly service industries, whose workers—often women, youth and low-wage earners—have borne the brunt of the impact. As Canada’s central bank, we set monetary policy to help create the conditions for broad-based growth and opportunity. Our mandate is to maximize the economic well-being of Canadians. Very uneven recessions tend to be longer and have a larger impact on the labour market. So, uneven outcomes for some can lead to poorer outcomes for all. Thus, even if monetary policy cannot target specific sectors, it is important for us to understand the uneven impacts of this recession and to make policy decisions that support lasting, broad-based growth. 
 - 2 - Today I’m going to talk about: ▪ the uneven impact that COVID-19 is having on different sectors and people; ▪ the role policy plays in boosting growth with benefits that can be widely shared; and ▪ Governing Council’s decision yesterday to keep our policy interest rate unchanged and maintain our quantitative easing program. Afterwards, I’d be happy to take your questions and exchange views. A very uneven contraction and reopening In our July Monetary Policy Report, we saw the recession and recovery playing out in three phases: containment, reopening and recuperation. We expected that the strong growth of the reopening would give way to a slower and bumpier recuperation. As a result, the economy would take a long time to get back to where it was at the end of 2019, before the pandemic. Data released since July suggest the bounce-back has been a little stronger than we had anticipated. By August, almost 2 million jobs had been recouped—that’s roughly two-thirds of job losses through March and April. This is very encouraging. But the pandemic put us in a very deep hole, and we still have a long climb ahead. For some sectors, the hole was deeper, and the climb back will take longer. Fields where remote work is possible have generally not experienced widespread job losses. And essential workers—hospital staff, first responders and grocery store employees—had to keep working despite the pandemic. We are very grateful to them. But workers in several service industries—such as restaurants, retail and travel—saw devastating job losses during the containment phase (Chart 1), and these sectors are recovering only slowly. Many of the businesses in these industries have closed.1 And many of those that have reopened are operating well below capacity. The latest data from Statistics Canada show that air transportation in June was still down 94 percent from February, and the food service industry was operating at 40 percent below pre-pandemic levels.                                             1 Statistics Canada, “Study: Monthly business openings and closures: Experimental series for Canada, the provinces and territories, and census metropolitan areas, 2015 to 2020,” The Daily (August 5, 2020).   
 - 3 -   This unevenness across sectors is disproportionately affecting lower-income jobs (Chart 2). Remote work tends to be possible in higher-paying occupations. Jobs in the service industries most affected tend to be lower-paying, part-time and with fewer benefits.  AgricultureResources† UtilitiesConstructionManufacturingTradeTransportation & warehousingFinance, insurance & real estateProfessional, scientific & technical servicesBusiness & support servicesEducational servicesHealth care & social assistanceInformation, culture & recreationAccommodation & food servicesOther servicesPublic administration01020304050607080901000102030405060708090Chart 1:Job losses were more severe in sectors with close contactand less remote work, affecting women in particular*April 2020, monthly data* The size of the bubblerepresents the percent change in employment between February and April 2020. Sectors in green represent those where women's share in employment as of 2019 is above their average share for all industries (47.6%). †"Resources" includes forestry, fishing, mining, and oil and gas. Sources: Statistics Canada and Bank of Canada calculations% of workers who worked from home, week of April 12, 2020  % of workers in a job involving close physical contact in 2019Less than $500$500 to $799$800 to $1,199$1,200 or more-45-40-35-30-25-20-15-10-50%Change in employment by weekly earningsChange in employment for all earningsChart 2:The declines in employment were greatest for low-wage workersChange in employment from February to April 2020 by weekly earnings, not seasonally adjusted, monthly dataSources: Statistics Canada and Bank of Canada calculations
 - 4 - These jobs tend to be held by women and youth. Women make up 47 percent of the labour force but about 56 percent of the accommodation and food sector. Young people aged 15 to 24 make up about 40 percent of that sector—more than three times their share of the labour force. Before the pandemic, the labour participation rate for women was closing a long-standing gap with men. That trend has reversed. The female participation rate fell during the containment period and is not recovering as quickly as the male participation rate in most age groups (Chart 3).  The closing of schools and daycares kept many parents at home, especially women, who tend to take on more of the responsibility for child care (Chart 4). How quickly this can be turned around depends on how the reopening of schools plays out and whether at-home learning arrangements allow parents to work. -2.5-2.0-1.5-1.0-0.50.00.51.0All ages (15+)15–2425–5455+percentage pointsMenWomenChart 3:More women than men have dropped out of the labour force Change in participation rates by age and gender between February and August 2020, seasonally adjusted, monthly dataSources: Statistics Canada and Bank of Canada calculations
 - 5 -  Job losses and reduced hours have been especially severe for young people. At one point, more than half of the potential youth labour force was underutilized.2 Among younger workers, women have been affected much more than men. Finally, although the data is not as complete for visible minorities and Indigenous Peoples, available data suggests that these groups have fared worse during the pandemic than other Canadians.3 For example, Statistics Canada reported that in August the unemployment rate for younger members of visible minorities is almost 15 percentage points higher than that for other Canadian youth. Moreover, as of August, employment for Indigenous Peoples living off reserves was still almost 9 percent below its February level, compared to just over 3 percent for non-Indigenous Canadians.  Incomes have been much less affected than employment, thanks to government programs like the Canada Emergency Response Benefit (CERB). And government wage-support programs are helping workers stay connected to their employers—many of the job losses from COVID-19 are temporary layoffs.                                             2 Statistics Canada created a specific definition of labour underutilization to track the impact of COVID-19 on the labour market. The labour underutilization rate as measured by Statistics Canada combines the following segments of the population into a share of the potential labour force: unemployed workers, people who are not in the labour force but who wanted a job yet didn’t look for one, and employed workers who lost all or most of their usual hours worked for reasons likely related to COVID-19.  3 In this paragraph, “other Canadians” refers to Canadians who were not a member of a population group designated as a visible minority and who did not identify as Indigenous. -30-25-20-15-10-505-30-25-20-15-10-505Under 6, menUnder 6,women6–12, men6–12, women13–17, men13–17, womenCurrent level vs. February, menChange at trough, men (February to April)Current level vs. February, womenChange at trough, women (February to April)Among parents, mothershave seen a greater decline in hours worked and a slower recovery than fathersChart 4:Change in total hours worked relative to February 2020 by age of youngest child,monthly data*%Sources: Statistics Canada and Bank of Canada calculationsLast observation: August2020%*Toaccount for seasonal fluctuations,staff compare the change in 2020 employment with changes in 2019 to isolate the additional changes in hours worked related to the COVID-19 shock. Change at trough is calculated as (2020M04/2020M2-1)*100-(2019M04/2019M02-1)*100 and current level change is (2020M08/2020M02-1)*100-(2019M08/2019M02-1)*100. 
 - 6 -  Still, young people and women are more likely to have been laid off permanently (Chart 5). On average, people who are permanently laid off take twice as long to return to work as people on temporary layoff. This risks long-term damage to their prospects. High unemployment for young people, for example, has been shown to have a lasting drag on their incomes.4  We’ve known for years that good policy frameworks can help set up a virtuous circle of sustainable growth with declining inequality.5 Over the past 40 years, Canada has done a better job than many advanced economies in promoting growth that is shared (Chart 6). While Canada and the United States have seen almost identical average growth since around 1980, our growth has been achieved with less income inequality. Income inequality rose in many countries in the 1980s and 1990s, including in Canada. But in our case, it peaked in about 2006 and has been trending down to stable since (Chart 7).6                                             4 A Statistics Canada study found that if youth unemployment stayed at its June rate of almost 28 percent for the rest of 2020, this year’s high school and post-secondary graduates could lose an average of $25,000 in income over the next five years compared with previous graduates. 5 For example, see T. Macklem, “Promoting Growth, Mitigating Cycles and Inequality: The Role of Price and Financial Stability” (speech to the Brazil–Canada Chamber of Commerce, São Paulo, Brazil, March 12, 2012). 6 A. Bowlus, É. Gouin-Bonenfant, H. Liu, L. Lochner and Y. Park, “Four Decades of Canadian Earnings Dynamics Across Workers and Firms,” Bank of Canada Staff Working Paper (forthcoming 2020). 52%57%68%49%47%40%36%46%9.4%9.8%19.0%8.0%-50510152025MaleFemale15–2425+%Permanent layoffTemporary layoffOtherTotalChart 5:Permanent layoffs drove more of the increase in non-employment for youth and womenChange in non-employment as a percent of the population, April vs. February 2020, not seasonally adjusted, monthly dataSources: Statistics Canada and Bank of Canada calculationsNote:Non-employment includes both unemployed people and people who are not in the labour force for any reason.
 - 7 -   Before the pandemic, years of strong labour-market growth brought Canada’s unemployment rate to the lowest in four decades. People who had given up looking for work found jobs and returned to the labour force. Unfortunately, the pandemic has undone these employment gains and more. Slovak RepublicSloveniaCzech RepublicIcelandDenmarkNorwayBelguimFinlandAustriaPolandSwedenNetherlandsGermanyHungaryFranceIrelandSwitzerlandEstoniaCanadaOECDGreecePortugalAustraliaLuxembourgSpainItalyJapanIsrealKoreaLatviaUnited KingdomLithuaniaUnited StatesTurkeyMexicoChile0.000.050.100.150.200.250.300.350.400.450.50Chart 6:Income inequality in Canada is slightly below OECD average and lower than in the United StatesGini coefficient on disposable income (after taxes and transfers), latest year availableSources: Organisation forEconomic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and Bank of Canada calculations→Higher inequality45678910198319861989199219951998200120042007201020132016%Top 1%Chart 7:Income share of top earners peaked in 2006 before trending downAnnual dataLast observation: 2016Sources: Statistics Canada and Bank of Canada calculations
 - 8 - Moreover, COVID-19 may accelerate some of the global forces that could make growth less inclusive. The use of digital technology has accelerated as COVID-19 drives households and businesses to do more online. Like earlier waves of innovation, digitalization can be expected to lead to broad economic gains and higher living standards over time. But there are risks, particularly in the transition. In the early days, lower- and middle-income workers are likely to bear much of the initial cost of displacement (although even higher-paying jobs are increasingly not immune). There are other ways that the pandemic could narrow opportunity. The commodities boom in the mid-2000s was good for both growth and economic opportunity in Canada. Higher prices for oil and other resources helped raise wages for workers in those sectors and reduced poverty rates in energy-producing regions. Long-distance commuting to the oil patch also helped increase wages elsewhere in Canada. The resource sector continues to be an important source of employment in many regions. Lower global demand for oil, though, means investment and hiring in that industry are likely to remain weak, and some projects may never come back on stream. Inequality, growth and monetary policy Because we were faced with an exceptionally severe and unusually uneven recession, the fiscal and monetary policy responses to the pandemic have been unprecedented. Fiscal policy has taken the leading role, with the government scaling up existing programs and introducing entirely new ones to bridge Canadians through this sharp downturn. Measures like CERB and wage-support programs have replaced lost incomes, providing a cushion for many families, especially low-income households. To help during the reopening of the economy, the government has extended its wage subsidy program and is changing CERB into an expanded employment insurance program. These programs are keeping workers connected to employers and the unemployed connected to the labour force, supporting the recovery. The Bank of Canada also responded to the economic crisis with speed and determination. We lowered the policy rate to the effective lower bound of 25 basis points and launched a series of liquidity and purchase programs, first to keep credit flowing and then to provide monetary stimulus as the economy reopened. With the economy now moving through reopening to recuperation, the Bank is doing everything it can to support growth and get people back to work. The best way to durably improve economic outcomes and avoid the scarring effects of extended job losses is to get people working again. By making credit more affordable, our policies help pave the way for consumers to spend and for businesses to invest and expand. By anchoring our actions around our inflation target, we will be supporting the economy through the full length of the recovery, helping to bring it back to full capacity with full employment. That is the best contribution we can make to broader opportunity. Striving for equality of opportunity is simply the right thing to do. It’s also good for growth. The loss of jobs for women, youth and low-wage workers is a problem for 
 - 9 - us all. If these workers become discouraged and leave the labour force or lose valuable skills over time, their reduced economic participation will lower our potential growth, limiting living standards for everyone. More generally, as highlighted in recent years by the G20, inequality can make economies less resilient.7 The Bank of Canada’s policy framework is up for renewal next year, and we were already in the middle of a comprehensive review before COVID-19 came along. As Senior Deputy Governor Carolyn Wilkins said recently, we are exploring different frameworks to compare how effectively they support price stability, the economy and jobs, including the distribution of income and wealth.8 We are asking Canadians to take part in an online survey called Let’s Talk Inflation to tell us how changes in the economy are affecting them and their communities. This will inform our review and help us understand how monetary policy affects people and their economic decisions. Our experience responding to the pandemic gives us plenty to think about.9 As part of our review, we are also studying the effects of tools such as large-scale purchases of assets, like government bonds. Along with many other central banks, we have been using this tool since March to stimulate the economy through a process known as quantitative easing (QE). The use of these tools by central banks around the world is still relatively new, and we are assessing their effectiveness. The experience of the 2008–09 global financial crisis in other countries led some to argue that QE contributed to inequality by boosting prices for financial assets held by wealthier people.10 It is true that QE works through many channels, including financial portfolios, that may boost wealth inequality.11 But as research on the experience with QE in the United States and euro area highlights, QE can also reduce income inequality.12 That’s because lower borrowing costs stimulate economic activity, which in turn boosts jobs and                                             7 See, for example, this G20 leaders’ communiqué from the 2014 summit in Brisbane, Australia, and this communiqué from the 2015 summit in Antalya, Turkey. 8 C. A. Wilkins, “Opening remarks” (remarks [delivered virtually] to Bank of Canada Workshop: Toward the 2021 Renewal of the Monetary Policy Framework, Ottawa, Ontario, August 26, 2020). 9 Other central banks are doing similar reviews of their monetary policy frameworks, and we are all learning from each other. See, for example, J. H. Powell, “New Economic Challenges and the Fed’s Monetary Policy Review” (speech to the economic policy symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 27, 2020).  10 See A. Saiki and J. Frost, “Does unconventional monetary policy affect inequality? Evidence from Japan,” Applied Economics 46, no. 36 (2014): 4445–4454; as well as H. Mumtaz and A. Theophilopoulou, “The impact of monetary policy on inequality in the UK. An empirical analysis,” European Economic Review 98 (2017): 410–423. 11 See Bank of Canada, “Monetary policy tools,” Monetary Policy Report (July 2020): 27–28 for a discussion of policy tools and the channels through which QE provides stimulus to the economy.  12 See, for example, J. Bivens, “Gauging the Impact of the Fed on Inequality During the Great Recession,” Hutchins Center Working Paper No. 12 (2015); C. Guerello, “Conventional and Unconventional Monetary Policy vs. Households Income Distribution: An Empirical Analysis for the Euro Area,” Journal of International Money and Finance 85 (2018): 187–214; and M. Lenza and J. Slačálek, “How Does Monetary Policy Affect Income and Wealth Inequality? Evidence from Quantitative Easing in the Euro Area,” European Central Bank Working Paper No. 2190 (2018). 
 - 10 - incomes, particularly for people with lower incomes. Research on this topic is ongoing both internationally and here in Canada. We will continue to study and monitor all the effects of QE. In summary, we know that monetary policy is a broad macroeconomic instrument that cannot target specific sectors or workers. But growth and how it is shared are not independent. The stronger and more durable the recovery, the more opportunity there is for everyone. And the more opportunity there is for everyone, the stronger the recovery, and the more durable is growth. Our decision yesterday Let me conclude with a few words about yesterday’s policy announcement.  In our deliberations, the Governing Council naturally spent a lot of time reviewing the latest economic data. We saw that the Canadian and global economies are evolving largely in line with the scenario we laid out in July. After shrinking by just over 13 percent in the first half of the year, the Canadian economy has bounced back even more strongly in the reopening phase than we were expecting. Employment has rebounded, although as I have reviewed in some detail, this rebound has been uneven.  The economy is benefiting from considerable fiscal support to protect the most vulnerable, replace lost income and subsidize wages. The Bank of Canada has complemented this effort by keeping credit flowing and reducing borrowing costs. The cuts in our policy rate combined with our QE program have contributed to reducing the interest rates faced by households and businesses since the pandemic began.  With credit markets functioning well, demand for our short-term liquidity facilities has declined, and the uptake on our provincial and corporate bond-buying programs has been modest. The provincial and corporate bond programs will continue as announced. The Bank stands ready to adjust our short-term liquidity facilities as market conditions warrant. Well-functioning credit markets and considerable monetary policy stimulus have supported growth through the reopening phase. In fact, we’ve seen more household spending—particularly on goods and housing—than we were expecting, largely reflecting the release of pent-up demand. Exports are also recovering as foreign demand picks up, although they remain below pre-pandemic levels. Despite this good news, the members of Governing Council still expect the recuperation phase to be slow and choppy. We don’t expect the strong rebound we’ve seen to continue at the same pace in the months ahead. Business confidence and investment remain subdued. More fundamentally, uncertainty about the future course of the pandemic will continue to restrain the economy, particularly in sectors that involve close contact. And the pandemic itself is accelerating several structural challenges, some of which I mentioned earlier, to which the economy will need to adjust.  The Governing Council also discussed inflation and its outlook. With CPI inflation close to zero, and downward pressure coming from energy prices, travel services and economic slack more generally, we expect inflation to stay well below the 
 - 11 - 2 percent target in the near term. Our core measures of inflation have drifted slightly lower, consistent with the unused capacity in the economy. So, we agreed that as the economy shifts from reopening to recuperation, it will continue to need extraordinary monetary policy support. This is how we can help bring the economy back to its capacity and help get people working again. The Governing Council will hold the policy interest rate at the effective lower bound until economic slack is absorbed so that the inflation target is sustainably achieved. To reinforce this commitment and keep interest rates low across the yield curve, the Bank is continuing its large-scale asset purchase program at the current pace. This QE program will continue until the recovery is well underway and will be calibrated to provide the monetary policy stimulus needed to support the recovery and achieve the inflation objective. Thank you. 
Benjamin E Diokno: Promoting retirement savings through digitalPERA - Convenient and Affordable Retirement Savings (CAReS)through Digital PERA #PERACAReSSpeech by Mr Benjamin E Diokno, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the centralbank of the Philippines), at the Executive Briefing on Digital Transformation, Manila, 8 September2020.*   *   *Ladies and gentlemen, good morning. It is a pleasure to welcome you all, as we bring togetherthe government and private sectors to celebrate this important milestone—the virtual launchingof digital PERA, or the Personal Equity and Retirement Account.Today’s event takes place in an unprecedented time. Needless to say, the COVID-19 pandemiccontinues to disrupt economies and societies around the world.The pandemic has changed the way we live, work, and communicate. But the crisis alsopresents an opportunity to rethink our priorities and to prepare for our next steps moving forward.Through this event, we hope to encourage more Filipinos to plan and save for the future amidthese challenging times. This aspiration can be made possible through digital PERA—aconvenient and affordable program that aims to boost retirement savings.PERA was established under Republic Act No. 9505 as a means to help Filipinos build fundswhich they can use upon retirement. Preparation is key when thinking about retirement, and thereis no better time to prepare than when you are still able and productive.After all, we deserve to sit back and enjoy our retirement after years of hard work. Unfortunately,this is not the case for many of us. In fact, most Filipinos do not expect to receive a pension intheir old age.Based on the latest report of the Philippine Statistics Authority, the Philippines has around 7.6million Filipinos aged 60 years old and above.Of this group, only 20 percent are covered by either SSS or GSIS, leaving 80 percent of seniorcitizens with no mandatory pension at all.Retirees who are fortunate enough to be covered by state-sponsored retirement systems receivean average monthly pension of P5,123 for SSS and P18,525 for GSIS. Depending on the lifestyleyou would like to have in your senior years, this pension may or may not be enough to meet allyour needs.  According to a recent survey, we Filipinos tend not to prepare for their own retirement.Specifically, Filipinos only set aside 3.6 months’ worth of income for retirement––way below theregional average of 2.9 years.In terms of expectation, Filipinos believe that savings equivalent to 2.1 years’ worth of personalincome would be enough for retirement. This is the lowest expectation in Asia compared with theregional average of 12 years. PSA reported that the share of social security benefits to GrossDomestic Product also remained relatively low at around 2.0 percent from 2012 to 2017.Security benefits include retirement and survivorship pensions, sickness, disability, death, andother related allowances or benefits.As such, voluntary retirement savings plans such as PERA are crucial in supplementing the 1 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
state-based pension plans to meet retirement needs.We at the BSP support the twin objectives of PERA, which are: first, complementing existingpension and retirement benefits, and second, promoting capital market development.On a macro perspective, PERA plays a pivotal role in capital market development and in drivingeconomic growth by accumulating long-term savings. This, in turn, contributes sustainability byincreasing the availability of funds for long-term investments.Currently, PERA is underutilized. Since its implementation in December 2016, the PERA industryhas not gained significant momentum. As of July 29, 2020, only 1,586 Filipinos had beeninvesting in PERA, with total contributions of P137 million. Of the total contributors, 1,099 or 69percent are locally employed, 273 or 17 percent are Overseas Filipino Workers (OFWs), and214 or 14 percent are self-employed. On average, OFWs have higher contributions at P110,000; local employed workers at P82,000;and the self-employed at P76,000. These figures remain regrettably low.To bring PERA closer to the Filipino people, the BSP—together with relevant regulatory agenciesand market participants—embarked on a collaborative effort to bring convenient and affordableretirement savings through digital PERA.Leveraging on digital technology, we revolutionized the PERA investment process by creating aone-stop shop digital experience for investor education, client on-boarding, settlement oftransactions, and monitoring of PERA investments.With this platform, Filipinos can now conveniently open or access their PERA account and invest24/7, anywhere in the world using a mobile gadget.You can immediately start investing from the comfort of your own home, without worrying aboutgetting COVID-19. At the same time, the cost of online transaction is relatively cheaper. PERAcontributors can send funds via InstaPay and other digital means. The digital platform also promotes integration and interoperability. It will connect various PERAmarket participants and products that will facilitate a more efficient processing of PERAtransactions. Consequently, this could then easily expand the PERA ecosystem and provideopportunity for more banks and other financial institutions to join the PERA ecosystem asproduct providers or even as administrators.For the less technology savvy or those who find it challenging to transact online, traditionalinvestment schemes for PERA are still available.This digitalization initiative would not be achieved without our reliable partners. Allow me toexpress my gratitude to the Asian Development Bank (ADB) for funding the development andupgrade of the PERA registry system or PERASys.  The PERASys version 2.1 provides APIconnectivity to PERA administrators and allows real-time processing of transactions. Phase 2 of the ADB-funded project is the development of the ePERA system for the Bureau ofInternal Revenue (BIR). The BIR ePERA system will facilitate processing and generation ofelectronic tax credit certificates (eTCCs) and acceptance of electronic reports from PERAadministrators. This completes the end-to-end digitization of PERA.Along with the digital transformation, a series of reforms were instituted to support an enablingenvironment for the digital PERA. First, we introduced the self-custody arrangement for PERAfunds. This basically allows the contributor to customize his or her own PERA funds and therebyreduce transaction cost.  This initiative is enabled by the amendment of the PERA ImplementingRules and Regulations and issuance of BSP Circular No. 1081 dated March 4, 2020. 2 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
Second, the PERA examination curriculum for the accreditation of individual PERAadministrators was streamlined.Lastly, tax and other regulations were issued to provide further guidance on the implementationof the PERA Act and promote operational efficiencies. We are grateful to our partner agenciessuch as the BIR, Securities and Exchange Commission, Insurance Commission, and theDepartment of Finance for supporting these initiatives.At the same time, let me recognize the efforts of the industry, particularly the Trust OfficersAssociation of the Philippines (TOAP), for assisting us in this digitalization journey.  I know thatyou have been working hard with the BSP PERA Technical Working Group to reach where weare today—but there is still much work to be done.After laying the foundation of a digital ecosystem for PERA, we are targetting to reach 5 millionFilipinos in a period of 5 years, or what we call 5 in 5. The target seems ambitious. But with morethan 40 million locally employed Filipinos prior to the pandemic and around 2.2 million overseasFilipino workers, I am optimistic that this goal is easily attainable.While the pandemic rendered many Filipinos jobless, we nevertheless expect the Philippineeconomy to bounce back and create more job opportunities for displaced workers.We recognize that achieving this target needs commitment from all stakeholders. We, at theBSP, together with other relevant government agencies, will continue to promote a conduciveregulatory environment for PERA. I encourage the market players to provide convenient and affordable PERA experience to yourcustomers.  I also hope to see more market players participate in the digital PERA ecosystem,such as insurance companies and mutual funds. To all the attendees today, may you promote the value of PERA in your organization, with yourcolleagues, and your families. At the end of the day, saving for retirement is a necessity.But this is just the beginning. We look forward to continuing our partnership with you to achieve amore convenient and affordable retirement savings for every Filipino.After laying the foundation of a digital ecosystem for PERA, we are targetting to reach 5 millionFilipinos in a period of 5 years, or what we call 5 in 5. The target seems ambitious. But with morethan 40 million locally employed Filipinos prior to the pandemic and around 2.2 million overseasFilipino workers, I am optimistic that this goal is easily attainable.While the pandemic rendered many Filipinos jobless, we nevertheless expect the Philippineeconomy to bounce back and create more job opportunities for displaced workers.We recognize that achieving this target needs commitment from all stakeholders. We, at theBSP, together with other relevant government agencies, will continue to promote a conduciveregulatory environment for PERA. I encourage the market players to provide convenient and affordable PERA experience to yourcustomers.  I also hope to see more market players participate in the digital PERA ecosystem,such as insurance companies and mutual funds. To all the attendees today, may you promote the value of PERA in your organization, with yourcolleagues, and your families. At the end of the day, saving for retirement is a necessity.But this is just the beginning. We look forward to continuing our partnership with you to achieve amore convenient and affordable retirement savings for every Filipino. 3 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
Once again, I welcome you all to this event, and I hope you enjoy today’s program.Thank you and stay safe. 4 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
      2 The Terrace, PO Box 2498, Wellington 6140, New Zealand  Telephone 64 4 472 2029 Online at www.rbnz.govt.nz             Banking the economy in post-COVID Aotearoa  A speech delivered to banking industry representatives in Wellington   On 31 July 2020  By Geoff Bascand, Deputy Governor and General Manager of Financial Stability      
 2     Hihiritia te ra, e tiaho ano ai āpōpō  – Harness the rays of the sun today, so that we may bring a brighter future tomorrow. Introduction1 The COVID-19 health crisis has posed significant challenges for the New Zealand economy and financial system and we expect it will take some time before we see a full recovery. The immediate operational challenges for the financial sector have been successfully overcome and the system has proved resilient so far, in part resulting from a stronger regulatory framework and favourable economic conditions over the past decade. As we gradually move past the challenges currently facing the banking sector, we expect issues such as alternative monetary policy, accelerating digitisation and new competitive challenges will shape the banking sector in the years to come.   In the short-term, business failures and rising unemployment will increase credit losses and act as a drag on bank profitability. Low interest rates will reduce net interest margins (a key determinant of banks’ profits) and may accentuate growth in non-deposit-taking, non-bank lending institutions. While changing consumer preferences towards online banking and digitisation of payments – which have been accelerated by social distancing – may expose differences in banks’ technological capacity and cost structures.  In the face of these challenges, the banking sector could choose to hunker down and seek to ride out the storm until the good times roll again. Or, the banking system could continue to step up and play a crucial part in supporting New Zealand’s economic recovery and maximise its potential competitive advantage of relationship lending and customer information. How the banking sector chooses to respond to this crisis will have a major influence on how the financial system evolves over the next decade.    Maintaining institutional resilience while continuing to serve customers in an uncertain environment will demand expertise, courage and an unwavering belief that the people and businesses of Aotearoa will find a way to come out of these challenges. Ultimately for banks, maintaining the flow of credit to businesses and households will contribute to the stability of the banking system. Longer-term, lower leverage, greater internal investment and risk management, and increased competition portend lower expected returns for bank shareholders than they have historically enjoyed. Evolving structural changes in the financial sector pose less of an immediate threat than the pandemic crisis, but could prove more disruptive in the long-term unless the sector responds to meet customer, investor and                                                 1  I am very grateful to Tom Bird for considerable assistance in the preparation of this speech, along with valuable comments from other Reserve Bank colleagues. 
 3     regulator expectations. For New Zealand, with its bank-dominant financial system, a vibrant, innovative and sustainable banking sector is crucial to our collective wellbeing (Figure A).  The COVID-19 crisis has reinforced the focus of the Reserve Bank – Te Pūtea Matua – on resilience in regulatory policy settings, including the imperative of strong capital and liquidity requirements. Our focus on risk management is also evolving so as to be attuned to changing structures and dynamics in the financial sector, including the implications of cyber risks, FinTech, climate risks, financial inclusion and the economy’s increasing reliance on payments system stability. These longer-term structural changes highlight the importance of a regulatory system and perimeter that can adapt to non-traditional financial entities, which is a key consideration of the Phase 2 review of the Reserve Bank Act.   Figure A: Country-by-country bank assets to gross domestic product  Source: World Bank (2018).  Resilience now and for the future  To-date, New Zealand’s financial sector has proved resilient to the dual health and economic shocks, and indeed, supported the business and household sectors through strong business continuity arrangements, the accommodation of many customers through the restructuring of borrowing terms, and only a relatively modest tightening of lending standards. Looking ahead, ensuring the ongoing health of New Zealand’s financial institutions and provision of credit will be crucial to our economic recovery. A financial crisis and ‘credit crunch’ on top of an economic crisis would be hugely disruptive for New Zealanders’ wellbeing. The ability of financial institutions to absorb shocks, manage risk and continue lending in the face of shocks is foundational to our regulatory framework. 0408012016020004080120160200DNKNZLJPNKORAUSSWENORGBRESPPRTNLDITAFRAGRCLUXFINAUTISLDEUCHLBELTURISRPOLSVKESTUSACZESVNCOLHUNIRLLVALTUMEX%%
 4     Banks’ business continuity plans have stood up well so far to this unanticipated and severe event. Prior to COVID-19, no business plan had contemplated 100 percent of staff having to work remotely almost overnight. Plans were not perfect, and of course there are lessons to be learned, but overall people and technology responded well to support customers. Banks managed to reassign staff from back office to front office, across geographies, and transition from manual to digital channels very successfully. Staff had to adapt to working from home with kids’ television programmes in the background, while also balancing increasing work demands with home-schooling!  New Zealand banks entered the crisis having built up strong capital and liquidity buffers in the prior decade (Figure B). Prudential standards introduced since the Global Financial Crisis of 2007/08 included liquidity requirements to ensure banks could support lending with stable funding bases. In the early stages of the crisis, liquidity positions were highly uncertain for a period of time, but buttressed by strong starting positions brought about by the Reserve Bank’s liquidity requirements, liquidity has been ample. Having a more stable funding profile allowed New Zealand’s banks breathing space to manage temporary disruptions when funding availability in wholesale markets deteriorated. Since February, no New Zealand bank has needed to issue term funding in these markets. As an additional measure to support the banking sector during the difficult period, the Reserve Bank made a number of liquidity facilities available that proved mostly precautionary, and itself transacted in a number of markets to shore up market functioning.  Figure B: Measures of banking system soundness  Source: RBNZ Capital Adequacy Survey, RBNZ LVR Lending Positions Survey, RBNZ Liquidity Survey, registered banks’ Disclosure Statements.  7.923.564.813.47.187.8Tier 1 Capital Ratio(%)% of mortgages >80% LVRCore Funding Ratio(%)Mar-08Mar-20
 5     Likewise, capital metrics were strong going into this crisis, boosted by Basel III regulatory requirements, a number of years of favourable economic performance, and preparations for the impending implementation of the Reserve Bank’s Capital Review. The COVID-19 crisis has underscored the importance of banks having sound capital buffers; increased provisions for expected credit losses have, so far, been easily absorbed by existing capital buffers. Healthy capital buffers are necessary not only to ensure banks survive crises, but to ensure banks survive ‘well’ and are able to continue to lend to creditworthy borrowers throughout a downturn. The Reserve Bank remains committed to fully implementing the outcomes of the Capital Review. However, as we indicated this past March, this will be delayed one year and not occur until July 2021.2 We expect to communicate further on the implementation of the Capital Review by the end of the year.  Looking ahead, the deterioration of asset quality will likely mean further loss provisioning will be needed. This could weaken banks’ capital positions. The Reserve Bank has initiated stress tests of banks to assess their resilience to a significant worsening in the economic outlook. Modelling suggests that under severe – but plausible – scenarios, banks are likely to maintain capital ratios above minimum requirements. However, there remains considerable uncertainty about the future trajectory of the pandemic, and how this will affect the New Zealand economy. Under severe enough scenarios, the viability of banks would come into question.   Beyond the immediate COVID-induced economic stresses, low interest rates are likely to be an enduring challenge for the banking sector. The decline in interest rates is a long-term phenomenon, which can be largely attributed to a combination of proven monetary policy credibility, a negative global output gap, as well as the downward trend of real interest rates caused by global demographic changes and investment/saving forces. In the short-term, low interest rates can be beneficial to banks by reducing funding costs, increasing asset prices and lowering default risk. However, a prolonged period of low interest rates could pose significant challenges to banks’ business models and profitability.   New Zealand banks operate rather ‘vanilla’ business models focussed on intermediating between borrowers and savers to generate the majority of their revenues. New Zealand banks are also heavily reliant on retail deposit funding. An extended period of low interest rates may cause the yield curve to flatten. This compresses banks’ net interest margin – the                                                 2 See RBNZ press release, ‘Financial system sound, and Reserve Bank providing additional support’, 16 March 2020: https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/news/2020/03/financial-system-sound-and-reserve-bank-providing-additional-support. 
 6     margin between the cost of banks’ short-term funding and the interest that bank charges on long-term lending – which is the main driver of bank profitability. This, combined with an effective lower bound on nominal deposit rates, may weaken bank profitability.  The consequences for lending institutions of very low interest rates are ones they need to anticipate and manage.3 They are also consequences that the Reserve Bank will pay close heed to. Specifically, when we make monetary policy decisions we consider the consequences for financial stability as part of the decision-making process, including any adverse consequences of, say, lower interest rates, alongside the benefits for financial stability that may result from a quicker or stronger economic recovery.  Reserve Bank actions to support bank lending For New Zealand, the COVID-19 crisis will likely result in the sharpest one-off drop in (quarterly) economic activity in its statistical history. Early on in the pandemic, it became apparent the COVID-19-induced recession and lockdown would have a significant impact on New Zealand’s financial system. Many businesses and households were facing losses of income, global financial markets were beginning to seize and supply chains were becoming congested. Cash flow and confidence became key to New Zealand’s financial stability.  To support the provision of credit to the real economy and keep the financial system stable the Reserve Bank worked alongside the Government and industry on a number of initiatives. We cut the Official Cash Rate and lowered longer-term interest rates through the Large Scale Asset Purchases programme.4 We also delayed a number of regulatory initiatives (including implementation of the Capital Review), imposed dividend restrictions on banks and insurers, facilitated loan deferrals with guidance on appropriate capital treatment,5 removed the loan-to-value restrictions, eased the core funding requirement and introduced a number of term lending facilities.6 We are continually reviewing whether these rule-settings                                                 3 Insurers are also impacted by falling interest rates. Whilst many insurers benefit, for some insurers with long-term guaranteed liabilities low interest rates in the short-term increase the value of liabilities, which has implications for insurer’s solvency. In the long-term, low interest rates reduce the insurer’s return on assets, which may require premiums to increase to compensate. In the past six months the Reserve Bank has had to apply prudential licence conditions to several insurers to boost capital buffers to mitigate the impacts of potential reductions in interest rates. 4 See RBNZ press release, ‘RBNZ to implement $30bn Large Scale Asset Purchase Programme of NZ Govt Bonds’: https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/news/2020/03/rbnz-to-implement-30bn-large-scale-asset-purchase-programme-of-nz-govt-bonds.  5 Ordinarily these loans would have been treated as non-performing with the consequence that more capital would have been needed. This would in turn limit a bank’s ability to extend loans and reduce credit availability.  6 The Reserve Bank reduced the minimum Core Funding Ratio (CFR) requirement in March 2020 to ensure that this requirement would not restrict the flow of credit to the economy.  The Reserve Bank intends to provide guidance on when and how the CFR minimum requirement will be increased back to 75% in due course.  Those institutions below the 75% minimum requirement will be provided with adequate time to increase their CFR back to minimum levels. 
 7     remain appropriate, and expect to announce the future treatment of mortgage deferrals soon.   Taken together – and without being too self-congratulatory – these initiatives have had a significant impact on supporting the short-term financial needs of households and businesses. This was important to limit failures of businesses with good long-term income prospects, and prevent mortgage defaults and foreclosures for borrowers facing temporary decreases in income. We of course would not have been able to announce any of these initiatives without the close working relationships with industry and the whole of government. We thank the industry for the open dialogue during this time and the numerous supervisory meetings held throughout lockdown. It is indeed times like these when strong relationships are called upon to facilitate the difficult, but necessary, discussions.  Bank lending activity The banking industry faces many emerging challenges – not least, retaining its social licence to operate. Banks’ initial responses to the COVID-19-induced lockdown was strong. Banks stepped up and supported their customers with mortgage deferrals, liquidity facilities, and covenant relief. Today, $20.6b of residential mortgages is currently deferring principal and interest payments, and a further $18.3b of mortgages have moved to ‘interest only’.7 This represents 14 percent of the banking sector’s mortgage book (Figure C). But a key determinant of the success of New Zealand’s economic recovery to come will be the willingness of banks to lend to productive, job-rich sectors of the economy so that we can collectively take advantage of New Zealand’s enviable position of having eliminated community transmission. Now is the time for banks to prudently drawdown on their buffers to support their customers. Shareholders will have to be patient for longer-term payoffs, but this forward-thinking, long-term approach will stand bank customers, banks, shareholders, the financial system and Aotearoa in the best position.                                                          7 The Reserve Bank has released new Bank Customer Lending metrics which provide more timely measures of the changes in lending to bank customers since the onset of COVID-19. Find out more at: https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/statistics/c65-bank-customer-lending-flows.  
 8     Figure C: Bank customer lending flows  Source: RBNZ Bank Customer Lending flows.   Given banks are anticipating a deterioration of their loan portfolios, hunkering down and tightening lending standards may seem to them to be the optimal response to perceived increased risk. However, given banks dominant role in New Zealand’s financial system a synchronised lending contraction across the banking sector would risk a ‘credit crunch’ amplifying the economic downturn (Figure D). Therefore ultimately it is in banks’ own interest to maintain the flow of credit and contribute to the long-term stability of the banking system by preventing large scale borrower defaults and disorderly corrections in asset markets.  Figure D: The New Zealand financial system   024681012140246810121427-Mar03-Apr10-Apr17-Apr24-Apr01-May08-May15-May22-May29-May05-Jun12-Jun19-Jun26-Jun03-Jul10-Jul17-Jul24-Jul$bn$bnInterest onlyMortgage deferral01002003004005006007000100200300400500600700Bankingsystem assetsStockexchangecapitalisationDebt marketcapitalisationInsurancesector assetsAssets ofmanagedfundsNon-banksector assets$bn$bn
 9     Source: Reserve Bank Balance Sheet Survey, Reserve Bank Non-bank deposit takers survey, Reserve Bank Managed funds (quarterly) survey.  In the year-to-date, aggregate credit volumes have remained steady and have not shown any material month-to-month contractions or growth (other than consumer lending – mainly because the lockdown forced households to put away their credit cards!) (Figure E). However, banks have reported a material decline in businesses’ demand for credit over the first half of 2020 (Figure F). While demand for loans for working capital from small to medium businesses (SMEs), corporates and sheep and beef farmers has increased, demand for credit for capital expenditure has fallen significantly. Businesses’ investment intentions have also fallen sharply, with increased uncertainty around the strength of future demand. Some apparent weakening of demand for credit may also reflect perceptions by businesses that credit would not be available or that terms have tightened.    Figure E: Annual credit growth (by sector)  Source: Reserve Bank Balance Sheet survey.            -15-10-5051015202530-15-10-5051015202530%%HousingConsumerBusinessAgriculture
 10      Figure F: Credit demand (observed change over past 6 months)  Source: Reserve Bank Credit Conditions survey.  Indeed, banks have begun tightening several lending standards, particularly around serviceability assessments and interest rate margins (Figure G). Much of the tightening that has occurred to-date has been limited to more risky sectors. For some (such as commercial property, SMEs and dairy) this represents a continuation of trends that preceded COVID-19. However, banks have begun to apply more conservative standards to particular sectors exposed to the COVID-19 shock such as tourism, retail, accommodation, and construction. While some tightening is understandable and will reflect the general deterioration in the quality of applications, banks should not become overly cautious and should continue to focus on the long-term prospects of the applicants.  Figure G: Lending standards (change over past 6 months)  ResidentialmortgageloansConsumerloansCommercialpropertyloansSMEbusinessloansCorporateloansAgriculturalloansDairy loans-40-30-20-10010203040-40-30-20-10010203040%%Mar-18Sep-18Mar-19Sep-19Mar-20Jun-20More demand for creditLess demand for creditResidentialmortgagelendingCommercialproperty lendingSME businesslendingCorporatelendingAgriculturallending-30-20-10010203040506070-30-20-10010203040506070%%Collateral requirementsServiceability requirementsRepayment termsCovenantsInterest markupOther factorsTighterEasier
 11     Source: Reserve Bank Credit Conditions survey.  Emerging risks and structural changes Resilience and its corollary, risk management, is not “once and dusted”. It is a dynamic process, one that must be continually tested, prepared for and built in the face of unexpected scenarios, and new and emerging risks. Today, new risks are emerging as industry structures, technology and environmental factors evolve. The pandemic is a reminder that periodic crises are a fact of life, but that the timing and nature of future crises are notoriously difficult to predict. Amongst the many significant challenges facing the financial system over the next decade are cyber risk, FinTech, climate risk, financial inclusion and the changing landscape for digital currencies and payments. These threats, and others, that may emerge point to the importance of strengthening the resilience of the financial system.   Banks should continually strive to innovate in response to competition, changing customer expectations, technological innovations, and the drive for efficiency. Change is nothing new. Banking in New Zealand has continuously evolved over the past 180 years; from small banks serving local communities when mobility was by horse and cart, to extensive nationwide branch networks where thousands of transactions are processed every second. Over the past 30 years, technological advances have accelerated the use of electronic payments at the expense of physical branches, cheques and notes and coins (Figure H). While bank branch numbers have been falling for a decade, there has been an increased focus on engaging with customers digitally, and the COVID-19 lockdown would appear to be accelerating this trend.   Figure H: Number of New Zealand bank branches & ATMs  Source: World Bank Global Findex Database (2017). 0102030405060708090010203040506070809020042006200820102012201420162018ATMs per 100,000 peopleBank branches per 100,000 people
 12      The Reserve Bank wants to see an innovative, dynamic and customer-focused financial sector. With the digitisation of financial services, the financial system enjoys more opportunities to drive up productivity and these innovations serve the majority of customers well. New Zealanders are enthusiastic adopters and have embraced the opportunities presented by technology (Figure I) However, any reduction in the availability of cash and branch closures will impact certain pockets of society more than others. It is important that financial institutions maintain a strong focus on financial inclusion, finding ways to service and support those less able to access the electronic channels. Regional banking hubs currently being trialled are one way to provide banking services in small rural communities.   Figure I: Measures of financial inclusion  Source: World Bank Global Findex Database (2017).   This drive towards digitisation could lead banks to aggressively pursue low-cost business models – a utility-type approach to banking. Or, banks could use their digital strategies to support increasing customisation, differentiated and customer-specific service offerings. Perhaps there will be a mix, with different service strategies for different customer groups or product lines. Corporate and business lending, by its very nature, is likely to require more relational banking activities, while mortgage lending has both commodity (utility) and relationship dimensions, and deposit taking can also reflect customer-loyalty. There are many niches in the financial sector, and different providers (including non-bank financial institutions) will seek to compete on the basis of their perceived business model advantages; however, increasing digitisation appears common to them all.   0255075100Deposit accountPaid bill onlineMade or received digitalpaymentDebit cardCredit cardUsed mobile phone to accessaccount%New ZealandOECD
 13     As banks determine new business models, increased internal investment will be needed in technology, customer management and risk management. Managing customer, investor and regulator expectations in the face of persistent structural changes and an evolving risk environment will require strong organisational leadership and governance.  Cyber Risk The flip side of digital strategies is that the financial system has increased exposure to cyber risk due to ever-evolving cyber threats. Cyber risk imposes costs, not only for financial institutions, but also for their customers and the financial system as a whole. We estimate the average cost of a cyber-incident to be around $104m for the banking sector and $38m for the insurance industry. To put this in perspective, it is the equivalent of 2-3 percent of annual profits for the banking and insurance sectors. This may not seem significant at first glance, but cyber risk is a typical tail risk. We estimate that there is a 5 percent chance in any given year that the cost of a cyber-incident could exceed $2b, which is equivalent to one-third of the banking industry’s annual profit. These costs include both direct costs from financial loss and indirect costs such as reputational damage and the opportunity cost from foregoing more productive investment.   Therefore, there is a great deal of common interest between the Reserve Bank and industry to promote cyber resilience. As a first step, we have developed guidance on cyber resilience for all our regulated entities. Consultation for guidance was initially planned for March but will now be released for public consultation in October. The Reserve Bank is also working closely with other relevant government agencies such as the GCSB, CERT NZ and the FMA to promote information gathering and sharing regarding cyber resilience.   FinTech The march of technological innovation is relentless, and disruptive technologies and innovative financial service providers will challenge banks’ business models at an ever-accelerating pace. ‘FinTech’ is the buzz term that encompasses a broad range of technologies that enable households and businesses to manage their finances, and includes open banking, real-time payments and digital currencies. New Zealand has a long tradition of pioneering technology companies, and has a strong pipeline of promising FinTechs with revenue exceeding $1.1bn.8 FinTech present both risks and opportunities for banks, and broader monetary and financial stability, and cuts across a number of Reserve Bank functions. This is not academic, it is happening now.                                                  8 Technology Investment Network (2019) TIN Report: Technology Industry Analysis (Report No. 15). 
 14      ‘Open banking’ refers to a standardised framework for sharing bank customer data. Open banking reduces barriers to entry and eliminates banks’ monopoly over their customers’ data, making it easier for FinTech firms to innovate. The secure sharing of customer banking data has the potential to promote financial system soundness. By increasing competition, and unbundling banking services across a larger range of firms, it reduces the systemic importance of large banks. Greater sharing of customer data may also create opportunities for more personalised financial products and lower switching costs (which may promote market discipline). Open banking also presents risks, including making the banking sector more prone to cyber risk.   The reality is that open banking is here – even if it appears slow to emerge for end-users.   The Reserve Bank is already fielding an increasing number of engagement requests from FinTech organisations. Banks’ business models and products must become more customer centric or FinTechs will expand at the banking system’s expense. The Reserve Bank is not guardian of the status quo. Whilst FinTech disrupters could weaken bank profitability and create transitional risks, ultimately the Reserve Bank supports a dynamic financial system focused on improving outcomes for customers and financial system participants. Commercial banks start with the advantage of established customer relationships and a prevalence of accumulated data. Whether banks embrace the opportunity of open data, or resist innovation and are competed away by emerging FinTechs is up to them.   The Reserve Bank’s Statement of Intent sets out our commitment to ensure the regulatory system facilitates financial sector innovation that benefits New Zealand. We recognise that there is more we can do, and will look to play a more active role to better understand the risks associated with FinTech developments, enable innovation in the financial services sector, and help harness opportunities for increasing financial inclusion and financial literacy. We believe the current regulatory system is sufficiently flexible to allow innovative approaches to flourish, but we will continue to work closely with our stakeholders to identify and remove any unnecessary barriers to new firms entering the system or obstructions for incumbent firms developing FinTech solutions. That said, the Reserve Bank has little appetite to lower regulatory standards for deposit-taking FinTechs alone. Minimum standards need to be applied to avoid risks to financial stability and the reputation of New Zealand’s financial system. Our guiding philosophy is: “same business, same risks, same rules”.   
 15     Criticality of payment systems Payment and settlement systems (often referred to as financial market infrastructures or FMIs) play a key role in the operation of the financial system by providing the essential services needed to clear payments and financial market transactions. Payment systems can vary from the EFTPOS system, which transacts millions of small retail payments between consumers and businesses every day, through to interbank settlement systems, like ESAS, operated by the Reserve Bank, which handles, on average, $30b worth of transactions each day.  FMIs are one of those critical infrastructures – like telecommunications networks, electricity grids and water pipes – which operate in the background and allow for our modern way of life. Nobody realises how well they work, until they don’t! The danger is that nobody invests in their renewal until it is too late. The banking system has a crucial role to play in supporting sector-wide infrastructural investment, as well as at the individual institution level to interface with FMIs. Rationing investment in this area is destined to escalate risks and challenges for the banking system.  Many FMIs are systemically important due to the role they play in the financial system and their high degree of interconnectedness with the rest of the system. Disruption or failure of any one of these infrastructures could affect the financial system as a whole, and create major solvency and liquidity problems for market participants, as well as disruption for consumers and businesses, making it difficult or impossible to buy or sell goods and services. These systems can also act as the mechanism for transmitting contagion from the failure of a systemically important financial institution, such as a large bank.  The new Financial Market Infrastructures (FMI) Bill will establish an enhanced regulatory regime for the supervision of FMIs by the existing regulator, being the Reserve Bank for payments systems and Financial Markets Authority jointly for settlement systems. The Act will provide the Bank and the FMA with broad information gathering powers, the ability to designate systems as being systemically important, and have enhanced oversight and enforcement powers.   Finally, one long-term, almost existential issue for the banking system arises from the declining use of cash and the potential for digital currency to be issued by the central bank.  While the Reserve Bank has no immediate plans to issue its own digital currency, it is an area of continuing innovation and exploration around the world, and one that we are beginning to consider its relevance for New Zealand. For now, the Reserve Bank is 
 16     reviewing how best to support, steward, and facilitate access to physical cash and we will continue to engage with the banking sector in order to effectively meet customer demands. For example, we have recently created a new department – the Money and Cash Department – to think broadly about a future that serves the money and cash needs of New Zealanders. This includes smarter ways of cash distribution, as well as innovative solutions to emerging risks noted above.   Financial Inclusion and Te Ao Māori Financial inclusion has become an increasingly important part of the Reserve Bank’s policy agenda in our capacity as a Council of Financial Regulator member and our own Te Ao Māori strategy. The Strategy helps to guide the bank in understanding the unique prospects of the Māori economy, how Māori businesses operate, and what lessons the Bank may learn in setting systemically-important policy with this view in mind. An important part of the Strategy is making clearer the unintended consequences of our policies on unique economies like the Māori economy.  The COVID-19 pandemic has demonstrated the disproportionate impact of such economic downturns on both Māori and Pasifika communities. These compounding economic impacts have necessitated the Reserve Bank proactively reaching out to its regulated entities, Government and Māori partners to form a fuller view of the issues. The feedback has highlighted a role for banks in bolstering financial inclusion through greater access to capital to alleviate the financial stress of these unique economies. For example, finding innovative ways to manage the difficulty of securing lending against collectively-owned land could yield significant benefits. As with the needed credit response to the pandemic, there is opportunity to enhance both soundness and prosperity objectives, so that a more diverse spectrum of New Zealanders are being serviced by their banking sector while still prudently managing the risks at hand.  Climate risk Climate change and the increased frequency of severe climate events will have a significant effect on New Zealand’s economy. The financial system’s exposure is primarily through the sectors that it lends to and insures. The financial sector will be affected by both the physical impacts of climate change (through damage to property and changing property values) and the transitional impacts caused by the shift to a lower-carbon economy, such as regulatory changes and changes in consumer and investor preferences.  
 17     Both these physical and transition impacts pose serious risks to our financial system: credit availability to impacted sectors may be tightened, extreme weather events will likely reduce firms’ output which may affect their ability to repay debt, while changing collateral values may increase credit risk. The physical impacts of climate change will be substantial. For example, the National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research (NIWA) estimates that $12.5b of property is already exposed to extreme coastal flooding in New Zealand, and that each 10cm of sea level rise puts a further $2.4b of assets at risk. Climate change also implies transition impacts – such as ‘flight shame’ or a shift to plant-based protein – that will pose unique challenges for our highly concentrated export economy. Agriculture is already staring down the challenge of a triple whammy of emission pricing, changes in consumer demand, and more extreme weather.  At Te Pūtea Matua, we see climate risk as having far-reaching impacts on the economy, and therefore the financial stability that underpins our economy. Managing major and systemic risks to the economy, such as climate change, sits squarely within our core mandates. We are continuing to develop our own climate change strategy, and disclosure will form a critical component of this. Disclosure of climate risks will assist not only by encouraging the market to price risk efficiently, but incentivising risk assessment and mitigation, and ultimately, investment in emission reduction and adaptation.  Industry has a critical role to play in assessing its own exposures, ensuring the appropriate allocation of financial resources through robust lending standards (and insurance underwriting policies), and providing the necessary finance for mitigation actions.   Changing supervisory philosophy  As risks to the financial system evolve, so too must regulation and the Reserve Bank’s supervisory philosophy. In New Zealand, regulation of financial institutions revolves around ‘three pillars’: self, market and regulatory discipline. While we continue to rely on all three pillars, the Reserve Bank plans to place more of an emphasis on regulatory discipline and verification than it has in the past, to better monitor risks to regulated entities and identify potential non-compliance with regulatory requirements. This has been enabled by our new Funding Agreement with the Government, which will allow us to substantially increase our supervisory resources, including increasing our Auckland footprint.      Disclosure will remain an important part of our supervisory philosophy. During business-as-usual times, transparent disclosure of banks’ financial information gives teeth to market discipline. During times of crisis, this demand for information becomes insatiable. Our 
 18     Financial Strength Dashboard works alongside biannual disclosure statements as a source of easily consumable information for the public to better understand and compare banks’ businesses and risks. Over the past three months we have observed a substantial spike in use of the Dashboard. As promised two years ago, we will be reviewing the Dashboard starting later this year, partly to ensure it maintains a relevant picture of new emerging risks such as cyber and climate related-risks9.   We are also making other changes to our disclosure framework. In future, banks will have to report all potential and actual regulatory breaches to the Reserve Bank, but a materiality threshold will apply to determine what gets disclosed to the market. The intent of the proposals is to enhance market discipline and reduce the focus on relatively minor breaches that may divert directors’ attention away from more important areas such as the banks’ overall strategic direction and management of key risks.      The next couple of years represents an exciting time of change for the Reserve Bank. The Phase 2 review of the Reserve Bank Act involves a broad review of the Reserve Bank’s governance and accountability framework and its financial regulatory powers. What is proposed is two pieces of legislation, the ‘Reserve Bank Act’ and the ‘Deposit Takers Act’. The bill for the Reserve Bank Act, which has just been introduced to Parliament, will give effect to decisions on the Reserve Bank’s institutional form, objectives and governance. It is expected that the new governance board will be in place and operational in the second half of 2022. Our focus is now turning back to progressing the Deposit Takers Act with the Review Team and Treasury, taking on board the lessons we have learned during COVID. The Deposit Takers Act is expected to strengthen and unify our regulatory focus on all deposit-takers – including banks and non-bank deposit-takers – and should be sufficiently flexible to adapt to non-traditional FinTech entities. At the same time, maintaining a regulatory approach that is proportionate to financial stability risks is important. The final Phase 2 consultation paper was published just before lockdown and public consultation remains open until 23 October. I encourage you all to read what is proposed and provide feedback to help shape the Reserve Bank for the next 30 years.                                                      9 My colleague Toby Fiennes will elaborate on our plans for enhanced Dashboard reporting in his forthcoming speech: “COVID-19, financial stability and transparency”, on 3 August, 2020. 
 19     Conclusion The COVID-19 health and economic crisis is still running its course through the world. New Zealand has progressed further health-wise than many countries but our economic challenges remain severe.   The banking system has provided resilience through the initial phase of the crisis, helping businesses and households to manage short-term financial stress and providing services in difficult circumstances. Banks now have a crucial role in supporting customers and the economic recovery through maintaining the availability of credit. Bank profitability will be challenged by increasing credit losses, but an unduly cautious approach to protect profitability is likely to worsen economic and financial stability.  Notwithstanding the extraordinary nature of the pandemic, these risks confronting banks are familiar consequences of economic recessions. The potential for very low interest rates for a long period presents a new challenge in New Zealand. Other risks continue to emerge and will present further challenges for banking well beyond the duration of the current crisis.  Cyber threats, climate risks, and new forms of competition will all disrupt the sector in various ways.  Banking must keep evolving. Old business models either get revamped or replaced eventually. COVID-19 has accelerated the already strong trend towards digitisation and online banking, while traditional branch-banking is waning. The Reserve Bank expects banks to continue innovating in the interests of customers and their sustainable financial viability. Maintaining support and service for vulnerable customers will be confronting but imperative, as will the necessary investment in technology, data and risk management. Shareholders will have to be patient for longer-term payoffs.    The Reserve Bank will continue to evolve its regulatory approach in line with emerging risks and structural changes in the banking and broader financial sector. The crisis has reinforced how vital (capital and liquidity) resilience is, but also how crucial it is to prepare for the unexpected and emerging risks. The future of banking is bright - provided we look to the future and start preparing for it now.  
30/09/2020Introductory panel statement | Deutsche Bundesbankhttps://www.bundesbank.de/en/press/speeches/introductory-panel-statement-8460341/530.09.2020 | Frankfurt am Main | Jens Weidmann1 IntroductionChère Christine,Good morning ladies and gentlemen,I am delighted to moderate the ﬁrst debate today.Dear Volker,Thank you very much for your invitation and for organising this conference as a hybrid event. Intimes like these, we are becoming more and more experienced in communicating virtually.Nevertheless, there is always a lingering sense of uncertainty about whether the technical set-upwill work properly.Before our single monetary policy started, there may also have been doubts about whether theEurosystem could fulﬁl its mandate to maintain price stability. Looking back now – on more than21 years of monetary policy and also “ECB watching” – the Eurosystem has delivered on thepromise made to the people of Europe to keep prices stable. This has been a truly remarkablesuccess. One key element in this has been the clarity of the mandate itself. In late 1998, the ECB’sﬁrst president, Wim Duisenberg, outlined the strategy for the single monetary policy in a speech.He started from his conviction that, by maintaining price stability, “monetary policy makes theIntroductory panel statementSpeech at the Institute for Monetary and Financial Stability “ECB and Its WatchersXXI conference”1 Introduction2 Christian Noyer3 Jordi Galí4 Helmut Siekmann
30/09/2020Introductory panel statement | Deutsche Bundesbankhttps://www.bundesbank.de/en/press/speeches/introductory-panel-statement-8460342/5greatest possible contribution towards raising the standard of living of Europe’s citizens andimproving growth and employment prospects”.  This fundamental tenet also inspired theEuropean Treaties, which enshrine price stability as our primary objective.So to answer the question raised in the title of our session: the mandate needs no modiﬁcationwhen viewed from this perspective. At any rate, the Eurosystem takes its mandate as a given. Andour actions will continue to be geared towards achieving our overriding objective of price stability.However, the Treaties are silent on how to deﬁne or measure price stability. Nor do they specify areaction function for monetary policy or a hierarchy of instruments needed to ensure pricestability. Nor do they tell us how to communicate with the public. Choices like these constitutethe monetary policy strategy. Given the profound changes in our economies over time, every nowand then, the Governing Council needs to consider the merits of the strategy it is pursuing. In thiscontext, the guiding question is how we can fulﬁl our mandate in the best possible manner.The last time the Governing Council evaluated its strategy was in 2003. Back then, the risk ofinﬂation approaching very low levels was already on the minds of Council members. As OtmarIssing stressed at that time: “We have both eyes […] watching deﬂationary as well as inﬂationarydevelopments.”Since then, the ability of central banks to prevent very low rates of inﬂation through the conductof interest rate policy has weakened. From a theoretical point of view, monetary policy needs topush the key interest rate in real terms below the natural rate of interest, or “r star”, in order toachieve an expansionary stance. Thus, “r star” is often regarded as a navigational guide formonetary policy, just as celestial stars used to guide sailors across the seas. But unlike the starsabove our heads, the natural rate isn’t (Tonne) something we can observe directly. Instead, wemust resort to models and econometric methods to estimate it. Often, “r star” can only begauged with very wide uncertainty bands, while the estimated level may vary greatly across themethods and data used. Moreover, “r star” is not ﬁxed over time. Fundamental forces such asdemographic trends or productivity growth may shift it. Indeed, the empirical evidence acrossadvanced economies points to a secular decline in the natural rate of interest that started back inthe 1980s and has continued since 2003.The resulting implications for monetary policy are challenging. At last year’s Jackson HoleConference, Philip Lowe, the Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, referred to them as “thediﬃculty of navigating when the ‘stars’ are shifting”.In particular, central banks around the world are searching for ways to respond to the decline inthe natural rate. Since policy rates may hit the lower bound more and more frequently, the leewayof traditional interest rate policy has diminished. In this context, the Federal Reserve’s shift to avariant of average inﬂation targeting and the clariﬁcation regarding the high importance itattaches to its employment objective grabbed the headlines recently. It is worth highlightingthat we do not have a dual mandate like the Federal Reserve. That is one reason why thedecisions the Fed takes with regard to its monetary policy strategy cannot simply be transferred tothe euro area, even though they may still enrich our own deliberations.[1][2][3][4][5][6]
30/09/2020Introductory panel statement | Deutsche Bundesbankhttps://www.bundesbank.de/en/press/speeches/introductory-panel-statement-8460343/5Another response to the decline in “r star” could be a make-over of our monetary policy toolkit,such as incorporating asset purchases as standard instruments. Clearly, large-scale purchases ofgovernment bonds can be a legitimate and effective tool of monetary policy. But, as I havestressed numerous times, they risk blurring the lines between monetary policy and ﬁscal policy.This is a particular problem in the context of monetary union, where ﬁscal policy largely rests withthe 19 Member States. In a similar vein, we should also pay close attention to how we interpretour mandate. The Eurosystem was granted independence in order to achieve its primary objective.The more widely we interpret our mandate, the greater the risk that we will become entangledwith politics and overburden ourselves with too many tasks. As a consequence, our independencemight be called into question, and rightly so.Some have suggested that monetary policy should also aim for ﬁnancial stability as an additionalobjective, on a par with price stability. For others, that might be a mistake. Certainly, we need toreﬂect on what we’ve learned not only from the recent years of low inﬂation and low interestrates, but also from the ﬁnancial crisis. Indeed, we should not forget that an enduring easy-moneypolicy can contribute to the build-up of imbalances in the ﬁnancial system. In the long run, theseimbalances could pose a threat to price stability. Thus, a monetary policy strategy would need tobe ﬂexible enough to account for such long-term risks to price stability.Finally, new developments have an impact on how we can deliver on our mandate. Clearly,climate change is a pressing challenge that we all face. How will climate change alter our abilityto safeguard price stability? Questions like these will feature prominently in the GoverningCouncil’s strategy review, but also in our discussions today.2 Christian NoyerAnd now I would like to introduce the ﬁrst speaker on this panel. Who doesn’t (Tonne) knowChristian Noyer? He was the European Central Bank's inaugural Vice-President in 1998. In 2003he was appointed Governor of the Banque de France, and later he additionally became Chairmanof the Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, a capacity in which Ieventually succeeded him. Moreover, we can both look back on a long period of closecooperation in the ECB’s Governing Council. He is now Honorary Governor of the Banque deFrance and continues to play an active role in the world of ﬁnance, including as a member of theFrench High Council of Public Finance or the Board of Directors at BNP Paribas.Christian, you have steered the Banque de France with a steady hand through times of ﬁnancialand economic crisis in Europe. As Christine Lagarde (then Managing Director of the IMF)highlighted at your farewell symposium, you came to be known as the “banquier anti-stress”. Maybe your love of sailing helped you navigate the rough economic waters. That said, I amvery pleased that you are not navigating the high seas today, but have chosen instead to sharewith us your profound assessment based on your wealth of professional experience.3 Jordi GalíFor a change of perspective, we turn to the point of view of a renowned researcher: Jordi Galí.Jordi is a professor at Pompeu Fabra University (UPF), a research professor at the BarcelonaGraduate School of Economics (GSE) and a senior researcher at the Centre for Research in[7][8][9]
30/09/2020Introductory panel statement | Deutsche Bundesbankhttps://www.bundesbank.de/en/press/speeches/introductory-panel-statement-8460344/5International Economics (CREi). Previously, he held academic positions at New York University andColumbia University, after earning his Ph.D. at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT).Jordi, your list of professional activities and publications is impressive. You are one of the leadingproponents of New Keynesian economics, pushing the research frontier on the analysis ofbusiness cycles, monetary and ﬁscal policies. Together with Richard Clarida and Mark Gertler, yousynthesised your thinking in a widely studied paper entitled “The Science of Monetary Policy: ANew Keynesian Perspective”. You wrote that article more than two decades ago, and your worksince then has continued to provide policymakers with valuable new insights. I have come toknow you and hold you high regard from various research conferences, and I am very grateful toyou for being a member of the Bun des bank’s Research Council. I have always enjoyed ourdiscussions so far, and look forward to hearing the “food for thought” you have brought for ustoday.4 Helmut SiekmannThis is something of a home game for Helmut Siekmann, as, for many years, he held the EndowedChair of Money, Currency and Central Bank Law at the IMFS here at Frankfurt University, who arekindly hosting today’s event. For some time, Helmut Siekmann also headed the Institute as itsManaging Director, and, since 2018, he has been Distinguished Professor at the IMFS. His body ofresearch spans the entire spectrum of public law. Furthermore, Helmut Siekmann has lent hisexpertise to legislative projects and also represented both Federal and state governments beforeconstitutional courts.He has also written and contributed to numerous publications, and his 2013 Commentary onEuropean Monetary Union, which he edited, carries special weight among his works. And thereason is not only that the book counts more than 1,500 pages, which makes it well visible on mybookshelf. Much more importantly, it has become a standard work for legal experts. ProfessorSiekmann, you have also undertaken extensive work on non-standard monetary policy – forinstance, most recently, concerning the ruling of the Federal Constitutional Court on the publicsector purchase programme (PSPP) of May this year. It’s no secret that you hold a critical view ofthe Eurosystem’s asset purchases. But I don’t (Tonne) want to give away too much. Footnotes:Duisenberg, W. F. (1998), The ESCB’s stability-oriented monetary policy strategy, speechdelivered at the Institute of European Affairs, 10 November 1998,https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/1998/html/sp981110.en.html1.Weidmann, J. (2020), Change and continuity, speech delivered at Deut sche Börse’s New Year’sreception, 3 February 2020, https://www.bundesbank.de/en/press/speeches/change-and-continuity-8247542.Issing, O. (2003), Press seminar on the evaluation of the ECB's monetary policy strategy,European Central Bank, 8 May 2003,https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pressconf/2003/html/is030508_1.en.html3.
30/09/2020Introductory panel statement | Deutsche Bundesbankhttps://www.bundesbank.de/en/press/speeches/introductory-panel-statement-8460345/5Deut sche Bun des bank (2017), The natural rate of interest, Monthly Report, October 2017, pp. (pages) 27-42.4.Lowe, P. (2019), Remarks at Jackson Hole Symposium, 25 August 2019,https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2019/sp-gov-2019-08-25.html5.Powell, J. (2020), New Economic Challenges and the Fed's Monetary Policy Review, speechdelivered at Jackson Hole Symposium, 27 August 2020,https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/powell20200827a.htm6.Deut sche Bun des bank (2015), The importance of macroprudential policy for monetary policy,Monthly Report, March 2015, pp. (pages) 39-71.7.Weidmann, J. (2020), Introductory comments at the press conference to present the Deut scheBun des bank’s annual accounts, 28 February 2020,https://www.bundesbank.de/en/press/speeches/introductory-comments-at-the-press-conference-to-present-the-annual-accounts-8264908.Lagarde, C. (2016), The Case for a Global Policy Upgrade, speech delivered at the farewellsymposium for Christian Noyer, 12 January 2016,https://www.imf.org/en/News/Articles/2015/09/28/04/53/sp0112169.
Eddie Yue: Opening keynote speech at HKIB Annual BankingConference 2020Keynote speech by Mr Eddie Yue, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at HKIBAnnual Banking Conference 2020, Hong Kong, 28 September 2020.*   *   *Mr Patrick Fung, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen,1. I am delighted to be with you here this morning for the annual banking conference of theHong Kong Institute of Bankers (HKIB).  It is great to see everyone in person, and I amgrateful to the organisers for the hard work they have put into making this possible.2. The past year has been a testing time for Hong Kong as it faced challenges on three fronts.We experienced prolonged social unrest of a kind not seen for many decades.  Geo-politicaltensions and trade wars have raised fundamental questions about globalisation.  And, as inthe rest of the world, the COVID-19 pandemic is causing severe disruptions to our economyand threatening people’s livelihoods.3. All this turmoil has put our institutions, not least our banks, to the test; they have had to adaptrapidly to constantly changing conditions. Hong Kong’s banking sector has largely met thesechallenges and continues to be resilient.4. This resilience stems from the fact that our banks entered the current crisis with some ofthe strongest fundamentals in the world. Through sheer hard work and by learning from pastexperience, banks have been able to respond to operational challenges posed by both thepandemic and the social unrest.  I would like to take this opportunity to thank everyone in ourbanking community for maintaining services to your customers during these extraordinarytimes.  The speed and agility you have demonstrated in delivering the relief measures hasbeen particularly impressive.  The resilience and resourcefulness of our banking sector putus in a strong position to handle the challenges that lie ahead.5. Despite the ongoing geopolitical tensions, I have no doubt that Hong Kong will continue toperform its special role as an international financial centre. China remains the engine ofglobal economic growth and the biggest provider of savings.  The Mainland’s opening of itsfinancial sector continues to offer new opportunities for the rest of the world, and Hong Kongis at the nexus of it all.  While our banks must continue to stay resilient against the manychallenges of our times, they also need to prepare themselves for new opportunitiesemerging from the transformations now unfolding in our region.6. In today’s conference we are invited to look beyond our present difficulties, to envision a‘Brave New World of Banking’ in an age of ‘Innovation and Transformation’. I congratulateHKIB on choosing such a forward-looking topic – one to which I have also been giving agreat deal of thought.  Taking up this theme, I will discuss three big transformations that arealready happening, and talk about how the industry and how we at the HKMA are respondingto them.  The three transformations are: first, the rapid advances in financial technology, or‘fintech’; secondly, the deepening of cross-border banking, particularly in relation to theGreater Bay Area; and thirdly, the trends in green finance.Fintech7. First, fintech and its fast adoption by banks and their customers. Hong Kong is among thefintech leaders in Asia.  The COVID-19 pandemic has given new impetus to the use ofmobile banking and electronic payment services, the most important technology in times ofsocial distancing.8. Customers who once relied on face-to-face teller services are now paying their bills andtransferring money to family and friends through electronic services. Older generations –1 1 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
who are especially vulnerable to COVID – have proven that they can be tech-savvy.  Some80% of payments under this year’s Cash Payout Scheme were made through electronicregistration, easily beating our expectations.  The Faster Payment System, introduced justover two years ago, now has nearly six million registrations and handles about 400,000transactions a day – over twice the amount compared with last year.9. Other initiatives transforming the way banks serve their customers include the recent launchof Hong Kong’s virtual banks and the growing adoption of open API technology. Retail banksare increasingly adopting artificial intelligence (AI) and big data analytics to provide tailoredproducts and services to customers.  These fintech initiatives help promote innovation andcompetition among banks, while increasing convenience for customers and improving thetransparency of choices available to them. 10. But as expected, there are also challenges that come with fintech expansion: cyber-attacks,phishing emails and other scams are reportedly on the rise, a trend that needs to beaddressed before it becomes alarming. Banks must continue to stay ahead of fraudstersthrough constant building and rebuilding of defences, rigorous stress testing, and educatingcustomers about cyber safety.  The enhanced Cybersecurity Fortification Initiative, soon tobe launched, should provide banks with a robust framework for managing the risks.11. Growing reliance on data analytics raises questions about data ownership and privacy. Aswe have seen in some other jurisdictions, AI and machine learning also introduce the risk ofdiscrimination, sometimes in hidden forms.  Banks have to guard against this by ensuringethical, fair and transparent treatment of customers, and by correcting model aberrationsusing human intuition.12. We realise that banks are at different stages in their adoption of AI technologies. For thisreason, our risk management approach as a regulator is based on high-level principlesrather than on detailed prescriptions that might stifle innovation or be disproportionate to therisks involved.13. Technology is not just about banks and their customers – it is also an important part ofbanks’ relationship with the HKMA. As we are a key part of the technology ecosystem, ouraim is to add value by facilitating the industry’s technology adoption through a range ofinitiatives, such as the AML/CFT Regtech Forum and the Regtech Watch newsletter.  As aregulator, we are pleased to witness the progress made by the industry in using Regtech tocombat longstanding issues – for instance, Natural Language Processing has been adoptedto control conduct risk associated with the marketing of financial products, while SupervisedMachine Learning can be deployed to more accurately help AML analysts flag suspicioustransactions.14. Understanding and facilitating the technology needs of the industry improves our own settingof supervisory priorities in a forward-looking manner. The HKMA’s three-year roadmap forSuptech adoption has identified, as key areas of focus, the need for a knowledgemanagement system to handle structured and unstructured information, and the need forcapabilities to analyse granular data.  The aim is to make our supervisory work moreeffective without placing unnecessary burdens on banks.  We have begun pilot projects toassess the suitability of various solutions.Cross-border banking15. Technology has enhanced the use of our natural geographic advantage to participate inanother major transformation: the growing interaction with the Mainland financial markets,particularly in relation to the Greater Bay Area.16. As a leading international financial centre, Hong Kong has a long and successful history ofserving as a gateway to the Mainland markets. We are the world’s largest offshore hub forrenminbi business.  Schemes launched in recent years, such as Stock Connect and BondConnect, have expanded opportunities for investors.  Last year, trading by international2 2 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
investors through Stock Connect more than doubled compared to the year before; andtrading through Bond Connect nearly tripled.17. And the best is yet to come. Take Bond Connect as an example.  Last Thursday, FTSERussell decided to add Chinese government bonds to its World Government Bond Indexfrom October 2021, on the back of increasing international demand for Chinese fixed incomeproducts.  This latest move, together with similar steps taken by other major global bondindices earlier, will create huge headroom for Bond Connect to grow.  Volume aside, theHKMA is continuously working with the industry and our Mainland counterparts to enhancethe scheme through improving trading efficiency, and exploring new products, such as repoand related derivatives, that will help market participants better manage liquidity and risk inbond investment.18. We also need the right infrastructure to support these rapid developments. The HKMA hasalready started a multi-year project to revamp the Central Moneymarkets Unit.  This willinclude a number of new services related to Bond Connect to meet the existing dynamicmarket demand and to position ourselves for the potential Southbound Bond Connect in thefuture.19. Closer to home in our own Greater Bay Area, we are looking forward to welcoming a newmember to the Connect Family. In June this year, together with our counterparts in theMainland and Macao, we announced plans for a third two-way cross-boundary scheme: theWealth Management Connect.  The new scheme will further increase opportunities for theindustry to meet cross-border demands for wealth management products.  Like otherConnect schemes, this new scheme will take an incremental approach, starting on aprudent footing.  It is important that we have a smooth start, so that it will pave way for amore fullfledged crossborder private wealth management service in the future.20. The three Connect schemes provide plenty of room for banks to broaden their services. Theschemes help enhance Hong Kong’s role as an international financial centre as financialinstitutions expand their presence here to be closer to their clients.Green finance21. Hong Kong has just experienced its hottest summer on record. Around the world there arereports of extreme weather events, widespread forest fires, and rising sea levels.  Climatechange knows no borders.  It is a source of multiple risks — including transition risks andphysical risks — that affect the entire financial sector.  Addressing this challenge requirescoordinated international efforts.  At the same time, the rise of ESG investment and greenbanking offers opportunities for financial institutions to develop their business, includingcross-border business.22. Many jurisdictions in this part of the world have in place roadmaps for promoting green andsustainable finance. However, the level of adoption of green finance varies, and adoption isnot without challenges.23. Among the challenges we currently face is the difference in taxonomies that define greeneconomic activities for the purpose of ESG investment. These taxonomies help mobilisecapital by reducing the need for financial institutions to conduct their own assessments ofenvironmental impact.  At present the two leading taxonomies are those recently developedby the Mainland and by the European Union.  The two taxonomies differ in some importantaspects, including definitions of economic activities eligible for green investment.  Suchdifferences could present impediments in tackling what is a global challenge: this hasparticular relevance for Hong Kong, which is a regional hub for global institutions committedto responsible investment.24. It is therefore gratifying to know that in May this year, the Mainland authorities have takenimportant steps to reconcile some of the critical differences between the two taxonomies.For example, clean coal is no longer considered green in the revised bond catalogue.  We3 3 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
expect more harmonisation work to be done by the two sides, though this may take a bit oftime.25. We are making progress on “harmonisation” within Hong Kong, too. This year, the HKMA,together with other financial regulators and relevant Government bureaux, formed the Greenand Sustainable Finance Cross-Agency Steering Group.  The Steering Group has two mainaims: to co-ordinate management of climate and environmental risks to the financial sector;and to help accelerate the growth of green and sustainable finance in Hong Kong.  One ofthe first tasks of the Steering Group is to develop a local green taxonomy that wouldincorporate the harmonisation work currently being done by the Mainland and EU authoritiesand take into account local circumstances.  The aim is simple: there should only be onelocal taxonomy for use by all financial regulators in Hong Kong.26. At the global level, the HKMA is an active member of international and regional networksdevoted to addressing climate risk. Through our participation in these networks we are ableto contribute to international efforts and to draw on some of the best expertise in these fields. We will do our best to align practices in Hong Kong with international developments.27. When considering international experience, we have to accept that there is no one-size-fits-all solution. This is something we are keenly aware of as we develop our regulatoryapproach on green and sustainable banking.  While we base this approach on internationalbest practices, we also take into account local conditions, recognising that banks in HongKong come in many shapes and sizes, and that their progress in green and sustainablebanking varies considerably.  We will be flexible, proportionate and inclusive in developingand applying regulatory requirements.  It will take time for the less prepared banks to buildcapacity to address climate-related issues; we are ready to work with them to help themcatch up.  At the same time, the fast-movers or market leaders are encouraged to make themost of the work they have already done.Building capacity28. The three transformations – in fintech, cross-border banking, and green finance – are stillquite new for Hong Kong’s banking sector.  Making the most of the opportunities they bringwill require changes to work flows and risk management practices by banks, as well asadjustments in our regulatory approach.  Above all, these changes require a wide spectrumof skills, both specialised and general.  This summer, HKIB, HKAB and the HKMA havejointly undertaken an exercise to take stock of potential talent gaps in the banking industry.29. That exercise found gaps in three key areas: technological and data skills; bankingknowledge – especially about the Greater Bay Area; and specific ‘soft’ skills, such ascreativity and adaptability. It is, perhaps, no coincidence that these are the very skills neededfor managing the three transformations I have described, and for leveraging on theopportunities they offer. Shortages in expertise are a worldwide challenge, so we cannot relyon the importing of outside talent alone. Developing the skill sets required takes time andeffort. Over the next few years, our banks, our professional associations and our educationinstitutions will have to devote substantial resources to talent development in these areas.30. We are now working with the industry to narrow the gaps in capacity. The solutions includethe reskilling of existing staff through continuing professional development. Importantly,banks need to invest in new talent capable of capitalising on the changes already inprogress, and equipped for the challenges that lie ahead. To this end, the HKMA will beworking with the universities and the other stakeholders to make sure they are aware of theknowledge and skills needed by the banking industry, so that graduates are prepared tothrive in this ‘brave new world of banking’.31. For more than 50 years, HKIB has played a key role in nurturing talent and professionalism.Your membership is growing at a phenomenal rate. Your rich programme of courses,seminars and special events offers continuing professional development that is directlyrelevant to the transformations I have described this morning. Today’s conference is one of4 4 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
the highlights of the banking year. My colleagues and I look forward to sharing with you, andlearning from you as the day progresses. We wish you every success in the year ahead.The Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Greater Bay Area.Open Application Programming Interface.Environmental, Social and Governance.Hong Kong Association of Banks.1234 5 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
29/09/2020Opening remarks at Distressed Debt Webinar - Deputy Governor Ed Sibleyhttps://www.centralbank.ie/news/article/speech-distressed-debt-ed-sibley-28-sept-20201/7Opening remarks at Distressed Debt Webinar - Deputy GovernorEd Sibley Opening remarks delivered at Distressed Debt Webinar on 28 September 2020Good afternoon all. Thank you to Stephen Kinsella and to all of you for joining this webinar on distressed debt,jointly hosted by the University of Limerick and the Central Bank of Ireland. This is a critically important topic forthe well-being of individuals, households, businesses, economies and societies. In this context, I am delighted tobe taking part in this initiative and look forward to hearing more from Stephen, Professor Mascia Bedendo andAlexander Lehmann and the subsequent discussion we will have with all of you. We are experiencing a profound shock. The ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic are tragic and seismic.The necessary actions taken to contain the health emergency have affected all of our lives. The effect on theincomes of many households and businesses have been profound, with many experiencing the stress of asevere and unexpected shock. The Central Bank is focused on doing all that it can, across all of its mandate, tominimise the effects of this economic shock.   Even before the pandemic hit, there was a significant legacy of distressed debt still remaining from the globalfinancial crisis and its aftermath. In this context, I would highlight two important research papers that the CentralBank has published today:1. Resolving mortgage distress after COVID-19: some lessons from the last crisis2. Behind the Data: New insights into long-term mortgage arrearsIn my remarks, I will focus on:I will outline how:28 September 2020Speech12345the immediate supports that are being provided to borrowers negatively affected by the pandemic;what happens next – moving from the system-wide temporary supports to more individually tailoredforbearance;the Central Bank’s expectations of lenders in their engagement with distressed borrowers; andlong-term mortgage arrears, which pre-date the pandemic.    payment breaks have been invaluable in providing system-wide liquidity support to borrowers;many borrowers can and are returning to a position where they can repay their loans; however, manyborrowers will be temporarily or permanently unable to return to full repayments, and that these borrowers willrequire further individually tailored support to address the solvency and affordability issues they areexperiencing;there is no regulatory impediment to lenders offering further payment breaks to borrowers, provided they areappropriate for the individual borrower circumstance;it is important that we focus on learning the lessons from the global financial crisis in addressing the distressarising from the pandemic and remain focused on continuing to resolve the legacy of debt that remains fromthe global financial crisis; and
29/09/2020Opening remarks at Distressed Debt Webinar - Deputy Governor Ed Sibleyhttps://www.centralbank.ie/news/article/speech-distressed-debt-ed-sibley-28-sept-20202/7Immediate, temporary, system-wide support for borrowersWe are in the middle of an unprecedented global health and economic crisis caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.The outlook is very uncertain and the path ahead for the economy depends on the scale and duration of thepandemic and its after effects. There is significant uncertainty, in particular, with regard to the future path of thevirus; the degree to which containment measures need to remain in place or be re-introduced; the immediate andlonger-lasting effects on behaviour and economic activity; the damage to the productive capacity of the economyand the pace at which economic activity normalizes.This uncertainty and economic disruption has caused a severe shock to the incomes of many households,businesses and communities across Ireland. This is occurring in an inconsistent way with the shock falling harderon some sectors and, in many cases, on those with lower incomes. Unfortunately, but inevitably, the sharpreduction in incomes has led many business and personal borrowers to have difficulty in meeting their repaymentobligations.Lenders across Europe, including in Ireland, have either voluntarily (as is the case in Ireland) or in line withlegislative interventions, offered loan repayment breaks (‘payment breaks’) to all borrowers whose incomes havebeen affected by the pandemic. This system-wide response has been undertaken without individual creditassessments and have provided liquidity relief for all borrowers, regardless of whether the income shock wasshort-term or potentially more permanent. These payment breaks were made in line with the European BankingAuthority Guidelines on Payment Moratoria.While pandemic related payment breaks were made available to borrowers at broadly the same time by alllenders, the take up by borrowers took place over a longer period.  Therefore, the rolling over or off of paymentbreaks is taking place over a number of months rather than all at the same time. As this system wide paymentbreak initiative ends, different approaches and solutions will be required to support borrowers unable to return tofull repayments.Following extensive engagement from March, the Central Bank wrote to all lenders in early June to detail ourexpectations in relation to the operation of payment breaks and the preparatory work lenders were required to doto ensure borrowers could be appropriately supported after the expiry of the payment breaks.We are broadly satisfied, based on the material submitted, that the lenders have operated the payment breaks inline with our expectations. The extensive use and system-wide take up of payment breaks has demonstratedtheir importance in providing breathing space for both borrowers and lenders during this first phase of the crisis.Notably,the Central Bank is prioritising its work on distressed debt and intrusively engaging with lenders to ensure thatthey meet our expectations.    678at their peak in June, more than 220,000 loans (representing over €27bn in lending) were availing of apayment break.152,000 loans (representing over €20bn in lending) related to Irish borrowers;9while those borrowers who had previously experienced payment difficulties were more likely to avail ofpayment breaks, more than eight out of ten payment breaks have been availed of by performing borrowers;10Irish SMEs have the highest share of loans with payment breaks (nearly one in five of all SME loans wereavailing of a payment break as of 4 September 2020);as the situation has developed many borrowers have been able to return to repaying their loans – the value ofloans with payment breaks had fallen by the start of September by more than a quarter from the peak for Irishborrowers;25% of borrowers remain active on their first three month payment break, 34% have received an extension,41% had expired; the rate of expiration is higher for mortgages (49%) and personal loans (39%), than for
29/09/2020Opening remarks at Distressed Debt Webinar - Deputy Governor Ed Sibleyhttps://www.centralbank.ie/news/article/speech-distressed-debt-ed-sibley-28-sept-20203/7What happens nextMany borrowers are now returning to a position where they can repay their loans and that their debt-servicingcapability has not been permanently reduced. Unfortunately, there will be a sizeable proportion of borrowers whoeither temporarily or permanently cannot return to full repayment. These borrowers will require further individuallytailored support to address the solvency and affordability issues they are experiencing. Recognising problems and finding the most appropriate treatment for borrowers who cannot return to theirrepayment schedule after a six month break is likely to lead to better outcomes for more borrowers thanpretending that the problems do not exist. There is no regulatory impediment to lenders offering further paymentbreaks to borrowers, providing they are appropriate for the individual borrower circumstance. However, thetemporary, system-wide forbearance measures, designed to help with short-term liquidity issues, are coming toan end.In this context, it is important to note that there are extensive supports and protections in place for borrowersexperiencing repayment difficulties.  These include the Code of Conduct on Mortgage Arrears, the ConsumerProtection Code, and Regulations for firms lending to SMEs. The aforementioned protections exist to helpborrowers, and ensure they are treated fairly by their lender.  However, these protections only apply if borrowersengage with their lender [for further information see Covid19 Your Mortgage Video].As outlined in the Resolving mortgage distress after COVID-19: some lessons from the last crisis paper publishedtoday and in previous publications, effective engagement between lenders and distressed borrowers is criticalto preventing the build-up of arrears and successful restructuring of loans where debt-servicing capability hasbeen reduced. For example, over one in six mortgages had, due to the effects of the financial crisis, availed of arestructure by 2016.In this context, it is important to apply the hard lessons of our collective experience of dealing with the debt crisisthat Ireland experienced after 2008, including:SMEs and Corporates where the rate of expiration is 20%-28%;  andthere are particular SME sectors (e.g. accommodation and hospitality (c.46%); arts entertainment & recreation(c.41%) where the proportion of payment breaks is much higher than others - such as construction where theratio of payment breaks has fallen significantly (21% to 6%).    1112131415temporary forbearance can assist borrowers return to full repayment if their income has temporarily reduced,but is not effective in addressing more permanent distress;individual lenders may be incentivised to excessively rely on temporary forbearance measures, which are notin the borrowers’ best interests over the longer term;while this may have implications for loan classification, excessive short-term forbearance and non-recognitionof distress let problems build up such that it became more and more difficult for borrowers to get to asustainable forbearance rearrangement;effective early engagement between borrower and lender is key to preventing the build-up of arrears andsuccessful restructures;no single measure will be successful in resolving distressed debt;research on the relationship between deeper cuts in repayments and lower probability of re-default suggeststhat the system will benefit from lenders taking a candid up-front view of borrowers’ repayment capacity, andhaving solutions appropriate to all circumstances; and
29/09/2020Opening remarks at Distressed Debt Webinar - Deputy Governor Ed Sibleyhttps://www.centralbank.ie/news/article/speech-distressed-debt-ed-sibley-28-sept-20204/7Central Bank expectationsThe Central Bank is focused on ensuring that there is appropriate support for borrowers in distress and thatlenders treat them fairly, through consistent processes, and in line with relevant codes and regulations. This willinvolve lenders engaging effectively with distressed borrowers to deliver appropriate and sustainable solutionsand facilitate as many borrowers as practical to return to repaying their debt in a sustainable way, while alsorecognising and prudently accounting for the level of distress in their books. Therefore, the Central Bank expects that the boards and senior management of all lenders are ensuring that theirinstitutions are:  1. No additional forbearance is needed: in cases where incomes have recovered or are on a clear path torecovery, the amounts outstanding may be paid back through an increase in monthly instalments whichresults in the loan being repaid in full in line with the existing term. Alternatively, extensions to terms may befurther required to enable full repayment.Or,2. Additional measures are required: due to the size of the income shock being experienced, there willinevitably be cases where a return to full capital and interest payments is not possible at the expiry of thepayment break. For these borrowers, the full suite of potential restructuring and resolution options will needto be considered.Recognition and classification (See Annex on Loan Classification for more detail)As I have touched on already, it is important for both the borrower and the lender that problems are recognisedand appropriate solutions found to support distressed borrowers. A failure to classify loans appropriately willreduce the probability of appropriate solutions being found for borrowers, will reduce the amount of resources(provisioning) being set aside to support the delivery of these solutions, and will reduce confidence in theresilience of the banks themselves.Moreover, while granting forbearance is a trigger for an assessment of whether a loan is in default, it is notautomatic that a forborne loan is non-performing. In other words, early action through individually tailoredforbearance can enable the borrower to maintain a viable performing status and avoid the loan be classified as indefault. This is a desirable outcome for borrower and lender and further emphasises the importance of earlyand effective engagement between borrower and lender.there will be cases where the income shock is so severe or where engagement is not effective that meansforbearance will not be successful and other measures will be necessary. In this circumstance otherinterventions and better safety nets are required, a point which I will return to shortly.    proactively engaging with retail and SME borrowers to assess borrowers’ capability to pay and determinewhether:    using their full suite of tools and forbearance options for those that require further support – this includesalternative restructuring arrangements (ARAs), if needed;not overlying rely on further temporary forbearance as payment breaks expire, and that they are only usedwhere it is in the borrowers’ longer term interest;effectively reporting on progress and the effectiveness of approaches that are being taken to allow effectiveboard oversight; andproviding appropriate supports to SME borrowers to allow them to assess the longer term effects on theirbusinesses and adjust accordingly if they can.16
29/09/2020Opening remarks at Distressed Debt Webinar - Deputy Governor Ed Sibleyhttps://www.centralbank.ie/news/article/speech-distressed-debt-ed-sibley-28-sept-20205/7Pre-pandemic distressThe Central Bank remains focused on those borrowers (primarily mortgage borrowers) who were in distressbefore the pandemic. Almost nine per cent of all principal dwelling house (PDH) mortgage accounts in Irelandhad some level of arrears immediately prior to the start of the pandemic. While arrears levels have fallenconsiderably since 2013, they remain elevated and are certain to worsen due to the pandemic.Of the 41,061 accounts currently in arrears of over 90 days, forty-one per cent are over five years in arrears,while eleven per cent are more than ten years in arrears. This means borrowers have accrued arrears on theirmortgage equivalent to ten years of repayments.  In many cases, borrowers in arrears may be currently making apartial or even full repayment. Loan-level data, covering the five retail banks only, indicates a significant variationin the proportion of accounts making a payment depending on the length of time in arrears.  One third of those inarrears of over two years have made no payment towards their mortgage in the six-months of loan dataanalysed.  Moreover, nearly half (47%) of borrowers with arrears of over two years are deemed to be non-cooperating.In the mortgage market, if we, economically and societally, want it to function, and for secured lending to bepriced in a different way to unsecured, then that security must mean something. We must continue to try and finda way dealing with longer term distressed debt.  We are continuing to push all lenders to deliver sustainablerestructuring where it is possible, and are also engaging with relevant stakeholders to explore whether there areother options or system-wide initiatives which will help.  We must also do all that we can to prevent the furtherbuild-up of this long term distress from the current crisis.ConclusionThe work of the last decade has delivered a more resilient financial system and improved borrower resilience sothat we are collectively and individually better able to withstand shocks and the financial system can continue tosupport households and businesses through a crisis and not amplify the shock. The extensive conduct andconsumer protection measures that have been put in place or further enhanced during the period havesignificantly improved the protections that are in place for borrowers – especially mortgage holders. The CentralBank’s drive to improve the culture of banks during this period is also relevant.All of these actions are and will continue to be tested for the duration of the pandemic and for as long as we aredealing with its aftermath. Given the uncertain outlook, we cannot know for certain the number of borrowers thatwill not be able to return to full capital and interest after the payment breaks. But it is safe to assume that it will bematerial across all loan types and higher for SMEs.  The level of stress and distress this will cause to individuals,households and businesses will be significant.History has shown that for the majority of borrowers, solutions can be found through engagement and awillingness for both parties to make sacrifices. However, there will be cases where, for example, the shock to theborrower’s income has been so severe or engagement is not effective, where sustainable restructuring is eithernot possible or achievable.  For these circumstances, further work is required to improve how the wider systemsupports deeply distressed borrowers and the functioning of the financial system for all borrowers. For example,improvements to the working of the mortgage to rent scheme, the take-up of insolvency protections, and widersocietal safety nets all need to be considered in addressing both the legacy of distressed debt from the financialcrisis and preventing the build-up of long term arrears arising from the COVID-19 pandemic shock.      Recognition of problems is the first step to resolving them, and this is obviously the case for distressed debt.Having appropriate strategies, financial and operational resources, a suite of appropriate solutions and theappetite for resolving these problems are also crucial. Conduct and protection frameworks are critically importantin providing vulnerable borrowers and ensuring there is a level of consistency in the approach being taken by alllenders to all borrowers who require their support.  And lenders must also ensure that they are focused on doingthe right thing, not the minimum amount, and taking actions that support their borrowers over the long-term.  We have engaged intensively with lenders with the aim of ensuring that our expectations are met in relation toboth the implementation of the initial system-wide response to support affected borrowers and to ensure lendersare prepared for what is coming next. We will continue to intensify this engagement to ensure that firms areengaging effectively and meaningfully and providing the appropriate post payment break support to borrowerswho need it. This does need to be two way street, and for any borrower who is concerned that they are may notbe able to meet their repayment obligations they should engage with their lenders at an early stage and/or theother support services, such as MABS, that are available.1718
29/09/2020Opening remarks at Distressed Debt Webinar - Deputy Governor Ed Sibleyhttps://www.centralbank.ie/news/article/speech-distressed-debt-ed-sibley-28-sept-20206/7I look forward to having a discussion with you to gain an insight into your research and to learn more about theinternational experiences dealing with this important issue to further inform our own approach. Thank you for your attention. ANNEX – IFRS and CRR LOAN CLASSIFICATIONThe Capital Requirements Regulations (CRR) and International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS9) providethe rules that banks must follow in terms of recognising and providing for distress in their loan books. The IFRS9 Framework sets out the requirements for loan loss provisioning and comprises a three stagerecognition process: stages 1, 2 and 3. Loans move from Stage 1 to Stage 2 where there is a significant increasein credit risk (SICR).  Forbearance shall be used as a backstop indicator that a SICR has occurred. The granting of forbearance will trigger a move to stage 2 under IFRS 9 and an increase in provisioningrequirements.  However, the movement of loans from stage 1 to stage 2 does not automatically result inclassification as non-performing or defaulted under the prudential framework.  The movement of loans to stage 3would result in such a classification as defaulted.  This is likely to be required where the bank determines thatthere is a significant risk to the ability of the borrower to fully repay the debt without realisation of any security.Under the CRR, loans are classified as in default when either the borrower is past due more than 90 days and/ orthe institution considers that the borrower is unlikely to pay its credit obligations. Indicators of unlikeliness to payprescribed in the CRR include:EBA Guidelines on the definition of default also provide additional indicators of unlikely to pay, i.e.:[1] This webinar is the first in a series of webinars to be run by the University of Limerick on topics relevant to theIrish economic and financial issues. The panellists include: Stephen Kinsella, Associate Professor of Economicsat the University of Limerick’s Kenny Business School;  Alexander Lehmann, Adjunct Professor at the HertieSchool of Governance in Berlin and a consultant to a number of central banks in Eastern Europe and the AsianDevelopment Bank; and Mascia Bedendo, Professor of Finance at the University of Bologna,[2] With thanks to Steven Cull, Fergal McCann, Andrew Hopkins, David Duignan, Terry O’Malley and TonyCahalan for their input into preparing these opening remarks[3] The broad scope of the Central Bank’s mandate that includes monetary policy, economic and macro-prudential analysis, prudential supervision, consumer protection and resolution places us in a position to leverageoff a wide range of tools, expertise, experience, data and information both in Ireland and as part of the widerEuropean system. 19the bank recognises a specific credit risk adjustment (SCRA) resulting from a significant perceived decline incredit quality;the bank consents to a distressed restructuring of the borrower, which results in a diminished financialobligation caused by material forgiveness, or postponement, of principal, interest or, where relevant fees.    20borrower’s sources of recurring income are no available to meet the payments of instalments;there are sufficient concerns about a borrower’s future ability to generate sufficient cash flows;borrower's overall leverage has increased;the bank has called any collateral, including a guarantee.
29/09/2020Opening remarks at Distressed Debt Webinar - Deputy Governor Ed Sibleyhttps://www.centralbank.ie/news/article/speech-distressed-debt-ed-sibley-28-sept-20207/7[4]  McCann, F. & O'Malley, T. 2020 "Resolving mortgage distress after COVID-19: some lessons from the lastcrisis". Financial Stability Notes Vol 2020, No. 7[5] Duignan, D., Hopkins, A., Meehan, C., and Sherman, M. 2020. "Behind The Data: Understanding long-termmortgage arrears in Ireland"[6] Central Bank of Ireland 2020. "Quarterly Bulletin: QB3 - July 2020"[7] European Banking Authority 2020. "" 2 April 2020.[8] Central Bank of Ireland 2020. "Dear CEO letter: Payment Breaks - the Central Bank's expectations"  and"COVID-19 - Payment breaks in Credit Unions"[9] Central Bank of Ireland 2020. "Behind the Data: COVID-19 Payment Breaks - who continues to avail ofthem?"[10] Gaffney, E. and Greaney, D. 2020. "COVID-19 payment breaks on residential mortgages" Financial StabilityNotes Vol 2020, No. 5, and Duignan, D. and McGeever, N. 2020. "Which firms took COVID-19 paymentbreaks?"Financial Stability Notes Vol 2020, No. 6.  [11] Central Bank of Ireland, 2013. Code of Conduct on Mortgage Arrears.[12] Central Bank of Ireland, 2013. Consumer Protection Code 2012.[13] Central Bank of Ireland 2015. Central Bank (Supervision and Enforcement) Act 2-13 (Section 48) (Lending tosmall and medium-sized enterprises) Regulations 2015[14] Donnery, S., Fitzpatrick, T., Greaney, D., McCann, F., and O'Keeffe, M. 2018. "Resolving Non-PerformingLoans in Ireland: 2010-2018" Quarterly Bulletin 2 2018[15] Sibley, E. 2017. "Non-Performing Loans: The Irish perspective on a European problem" Speech at ESRBConference on 22 September 2017.[16] See Annex – IFRS and CRR Loan Classification for more detail[17] Duignan, D., Hopkins, A., Meehan, C., and Sherman, M. 2020. ""[18] [19] Forbearance is defined as a concession by an institution towards an obligor that is experiencing or is likely toexperience difficulties in meeting its financial commitments (Art. 47b CRR).[20] European Banking Authority 2017. "."Final Report of Payment MoratoriaBehind The Data: Understanding long-termmortgage arrears in IrelandMABSGuidelines on the application of the definition of default under Article 178of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013
29/09/2020When markets fail – the need for collective action in tackling climate changehttps://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2020/html/ecb.sp200928_1~268b0b672f.en.html1/7SPEECHWhen markets fail – the need for collectiveaction in tackling climate changeSpeech by Isabel Schnabel, Member of the Executive Board of the ECB, at the EuropeanSustainable Finance Summit, Frankfurt am Main, 28 September 2020Frankfurt am Main, 28 September 2020There has been a growing debate about the role that monetary policy should play in addressing therisks of climate change. The coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic has intensified this debate inseveral ways.[1]It has laid bare how large global shocks can affect price stability and hence the conduct ofmonetary policy. The pandemic has also testified to the vulnerability of financial markets to tailevents – a risk that many observers see in the prevailing pricing, or mispricing, of climate risks.In my remarks this afternoon, I will argue that, despite growing efforts, policies to mitigate theadverse and partly irreversible effects of climate change are not moving fast enough to limit thephysical and financial risks that global warming poses to our society.I will argue that collective action, by governments, firms, investors, households and central banks,including the European Central Bank (ECB), is required to accelerate the transition towards acarbon-neutral economy and correct prevailing market failures.Physical and transition risks threaten economic growthClimate change poses an exceptional risk to our society. There has been an alarming rise in globaltemperatures, which have been far higher in the past decade than their 100-year average (seeslide 2). Studies show that the world as a whole, including Europe, is expected to face highertemperatures, with significant and rising risks of droughts, floods and fires.[2]Just how severely our lives and economies will be affected by climate change in the futuredepends on our determination today to take decisive global policy action.Some argue that these efforts already come far too late. Emissions are highly persistent andremain in the atmosphere for a considerable period of time. In other words, irrevocabletemperature increases have already been locked in and there is a significant lag in discerning thebenefits of mitigation measures (see slide 3).[3]The physical damages of climate change are already clearly visible. The economic costs of climatechange are growing steadily: the share of weather-related catastrophe losses accounted for over80% of insured catastrophe losses in 2018 and the share of climate-related disasters has been ona sharp upward trend since the 1980s (see slide 4).Physical risks are compounded by rising transition risks. As we migrate towards a carbon-neutraleconomy, we are likely to see wide-ranging economic dislocations across both sectors and regions.All in all, there have been few instances in the past where society and policymakers have facedsuch a clear and significant threat to lives, jobs and prosperity. There is now broad agreement that,
29/09/2020When markets fail – the need for collective action in tackling climate changehttps://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2020/html/ecb.sp200928_1~268b0b672f.en.html2/7if left unaddressed, climate change will reduce global GDP by a substantial margin, with poorernations being hardest hit.[4]According to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), a persistent increase in the average globaltemperature by 0.04°C per year, in the absence of mitigation policies, is estimated to reduce worldreal GDP per capita by more than 7% by 2100.[5]Despite these abundant and rising risks, the world economy seems largely unprepared. Last year,carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions continued to increase globally, mostly on account of emergingmarket economies, although they fell in the European Union (EU). The fall in emissions this yeardue to the pandemic is likely to have only offered a temporary respite in the absence of moreforceful policy action.Climate risks are also still firmly embedded in our economic structures. In the euro area, eventoday nearly 40% of jobs are in carbon-intensive sectors, compared with 32% in the United States(see left chart on slide 5). In some euro area economies, this share is even larger.Path dependency and a lack of business dynamism have so far prevented the euro area frombuilding a growth model that is fit for the challenges of tomorrow (see right chart on slide 5).Climate risks remain mispricedThere is also broad agreement that climate risks continue to be mispriced in financial markets.Empirical evidence suggests that there are at least two forces at play: first, mispricing as a resultof informational market failures that stem primarily from the absence of a clear, consistent andtransparent globally agreed taxonomy accompanied by disclosure requirements; and, second, thefailure of market participants to correctly and fully price externalities as well as tail events that falloutside the historical distribution of outcomes.The first point is easy to see.Europe has become a world leader in the issuance of green bonds. During the period 2013-2019,total net euro-denominated green bond issuance accounted for nearly half of global issuance (seeleft chart on slide 6). Data broken down by issuers also suggest that the green bond market inEurope is broadening continuously (see right chart on slide 6).But environmental ratings for green bonds or other financial instruments – if available – are ofteninconsistent, incomparable and, at times, unreliable. In many cases, this reflects the absence ofgranular data or the large degree of discretion in the construction of such indicators. As a result,ratings often have a very low correlation, even though there appears to be a slight improvementover time (see slide 7).In the absence of common and clear definitions, as well as disclosure requirements, such ratingscarry the risk of “greenwashing”, providing little guidance to investors and setting insufficientincentives for companies to improve their ecological performance. Indeed, new research by theBank for International Settlements (BIS) documents that green bonds have not necessarilytranslated into comparatively low or falling carbon emissions at firm level.[6]Nor have green bonds consistently led to lower yields. Many green corporate bonds still trade at apositive spread to conventional bonds, also because of lower liquidity (see slide 8).[7] Hence, itappears that markets still fail to internalise the costs that climate change imposes on society.The second point is that although clearer rules and definitions are necessary, they are unlikely tobe sufficient by themselves. In the absence of an, ideally global, price for CO2 emissions, financial
29/09/2020When markets fail – the need for collective action in tackling climate changehttps://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2020/html/ecb.sp200928_1~268b0b672f.en.html3/7markets will continue to overestimate the returns of carbon-intensive assets and hence allocatecapital sub-optimally.[8]Europe is spearheading global efforts to put a price on CO2 emissions. The EU’s emissions tradingsystem (ETS) is the world’s largest carbon market. But it remains incomplete, as it only coverseconomic sectors that together account for less than half of total carbon emissions in the EU. Andcurrent prices, although high by historical standards, remain far from the levels that would beconsistent with limiting global warming to 2° Celsius or less (see left chart slide 9).[9]As a result, current carbon prices do not yet serve as a proper corrective device, including infinancial markets. Empirical evidence, for example, shows that the difference in the cumulativeexcess returns of a representative green and carbon-intensive portfolio was rather small over mostof the period 2006-2019 (see right chart slide 9).[10]Delayed actions to tackle climate change entail higher costsThe implication is that current market prices are unlikely to yield the needed transition towards acarbon-neutral economy at the pace required to stimulate investment and innovation andsafeguard a sustainable growth path with stable prices.Issuance volumes, too, remain far from sufficient, despite recent growth (see left chart on slide 10).Last year, green bonds accounted for less than 5% of total issuance volumes. To become climate-neutral by 2050, the European Commission estimates that the EU needs up to €290 billion inadditional yearly investments over the coming decades, compared with issuance of €100 billion lastyear.[11]The pandemic has exposed the simmering financial vulnerabilities that a too hesitant transition to alow-carbon economy may entail. Most major European car producers, for example, have seen theirmarket capitalisation fall by around 10-50% since the start of the year. Tesla, by contrast, thelargest electric vehicle manufacturer in the world, saw its market capitalisation increase by a factorof almost five.Such sudden and drastic changes in relative stock prices signal that transition risks are notconfined to specific sectors or countries. Indeed, within the same industry, there are often widevariations across the universe of firms (see right chart on slide 10). So, it is clear that climatechange will create both winners and losers.But the aggregate risks of doing too little too late are significant. Recent analysis by theEurosystem demonstrates the significant macroeconomic costs of delaying action for too long (seeslide 11).[12]The analysis shows that, if the global carbon price were to suddenly increase by USD 100 as partof an abrupt and belated tightening of policies that mitigate climate change, stock prices would beexpected to drop sharply, while euro area GDP would decline by almost 2.5% below its baselinelevel within a two-year horizon.As a result, the Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1) ratio of euro area banks could be expected to dropby 0.8 percentage points at the peak and, in the first year of the scenario, lending in real termswould contract by approximately 5% compared with the baseline scenario, with highly persistenteffects.By contrast, the transition costs of a sudden and unexpected breakthrough in energy storagetechnologies would be more moderate. A doubling of the share of renewable energy over a five-year period would be expected to temporarily depress economic growth owing to the resulting
29/09/2020When markets fail – the need for collective action in tackling climate changehttps://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2020/html/ecb.sp200928_1~268b0b672f.en.html4/7redistribution across sectors and the write-off of carbon-intensive assets. But new technologieswould steadily support growth, valuations and lending.In other words, there are clear benefits to frontloading mitigation policies, with timely actionimplying the need for a less abrupt adjustment in the future.Collective action for a faster transition towards a carbon-neutral economyWhat, then, needs to be done to make our economies and financial system more resilient to therisks posed by climate change?In short, I would argue that it requires collective and concerted action by all stakeholders, first andforemost by legislators and national governments.There is broad agreement among economists that environmental externalities should be correctedprimarily by increasing the price on greenhouse gas emissions. A global carbon price is the mostpowerful way to correct market failures and to set in motion a process whereby firms andhouseholds reduce their energy use and make a permanent shift to cleaner energy sources.A higher carbon price, however, needs to be complemented by large-scale investment in greentechnologies to ensure, for example, that consumers have sustainable alternatives intransportation.The Next Generation EU recovery fund should be the cornerstone of these efforts in theEuropean Union: the commitment by leaders to earmark one-third of the funds for climate projectsis expected to fuel and scale up the search for new green breakthrough technologies.A functioning capital market is needed to fund green investments.[13] Euro area firms still lackaccess to capital markets as deep and liquid as those of their international peers. The US stockmarket remains by far the largest in the world. Today, it accounts for nearly 60% of global stockmarket capitalisation, compared with less than 6% for Germany and France combined.[14]The funding mix matters. Empirical evidence suggests that stock markets are more effective thanbanks in financing the greening of our economy, given the high capital intensity, high risks andlong-term horizon of most projects.[15] Other research suggests that deeper equity markets aremore effective in bringing economies closer to the technological frontier.[16]Europe therefore urgently needs to make faster progress towards creating a true capital marketsunion, with a strong focus on equity markets and green financial instruments.An ambitious climate strategy needs to guide and steer implementation. The proposal by thePresident of the European Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, to cut the EU’s greenhouse gasemissions by at least 55%, rather than 40%, by 2030 is an important step in this direction.Such targets matter. Indeed, we should resist calls to delay or amend the implementation of carbonpolicies in an apparent attempt to strengthen the recovery from the current crisis.Although controversial, there is ample evidence in favour of the so-called Porter hypothesis – theview that the stringency of domestic environmental regulation can be an important driver ofenvironmental innovation.[17] This might be particularly important in the euro area, which iscurrently lagging behind in the quest for new technologies in a number of areas, such as thetransport, battery or solar energy sectors.New ECB analysis confirms that, for the case of the EU, stricter environmental regulation does notappear to slow down economic recoveries (see left chart slide 12). By penalising the use of carbon
29/09/2020When markets fail – the need for collective action in tackling climate changehttps://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2020/html/ecb.sp200928_1~268b0b672f.en.html5/7in production, it facilitates the reallocation of resources into green sectors and turns them intoengines of growth (see right chart slide 12). Countries with weak environmental standards leavethis growth potential untapped.The Eurosystem, for its part, cannot be a bystander in the transition towards a carbon-neutraleconomy. I see three dimensions of support.First, as prudential supervisor, we have an obligation to protect the safety and soundness of thebanking sector.[18] This includes making sure that banks properly assess the risks from carbon-intensive exposures, which could raise the relative attractiveness of lending to climate-friendlyprojects.We are building a robust analytical framework to improve the modelling of climate risks, whichshould also inform and support investors in pricing assets more accurately.These efforts include an ECB stress testing framework suitable for addressing the uniquechallenges posed by climate risks. We will also leverage joint work with the Network for Greeningthe Financial System, working together with counterparts around the world, on devising newmodels that quantify the economic and financial impacts of a number of transition scenarios at thesectoral level, spanning decades into the future.[19]Second, as large-scale investor, we have an obligation to appropriately reflect climate risks onour balance sheet. As part of this process, we are constantly examining whether our non-monetarypolicy portfolios are invested responsibly.And, third, as independent guardian of the single currency, we are investigating if and howour monetary policy operations and portfolios could be adjusted to reflect the fact that climatechange, if not addressed swiftly, may affect the economy in ways that pose potentially materialrisks to price stability in the medium to long term.For example, we could consider linking the eligibility of securities as collateral in our refinancingoperations to the disclosure regime of the issuing firms. Then the Eurosystem would only acceptcollateral if it is able to fully assess climate-related risks. In addition, we could consider adjustingthe haircuts to the risks we identify. Clearly, there are strong and mutually reinforcing synergiesbetween the actions on the prudential and central banking sides.We could also consider reassessing the benchmark allocation of our private asset purchaseprogrammes. In the presence of market failures, market neutrality may not be the appropriatebenchmark for a central bank when the market by itself is not achieving efficient outcomes.[20]An important first step in contributing to correcting prevailing market failures is to improvedisclosure requirements and reduce informational inefficiencies. The ECB is actively engaged inthis endeavour.But should such measures not prove sufficient, or should they progress too slowly, we couldconsider other options, such as, for example, excluding certain bonds – based on clear andtransparent rules – that are used to finance projects that conflict with the decarbonisationobjectives of the EU.In doing so, we could avoid a scenario in which our monetary policy contributes to locking ininvestments in sectors and technologies that are more acutely exposed to the disruptive effects ofthe transition to a carbon-neutral economy.A meaningful policy in that direction would rely, however, on a greater supply of sustainable bonds.[21]Small incentives, such as making particular sustainability-linked bonds eligible for central bank
29/09/2020When markets fail – the need for collective action in tackling climate changehttps://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2020/html/ecb.sp200928_1~268b0b672f.en.html6/7operations, as we have done recently, may provide additional incentives for such markets to grow.The Governing Council will discuss these and other options during our monetary policy strategyreview, which we have just relaunched after a pause following the onset of the pandemic. Thesereflections will also include an assessment of the risks that a lack of action on the part of the ECBcould imply for our price stability mandate.ConclusionLet me conclude.Prevailing and deep-seated market failures continue to prevent the transition towards a carbon-neutral economy at the pace that is required to ward off the exceptional, and partly irreversible,risks that climate change poses to society. In many cases, climate change is still seen as areputational risk rather than a financial or existential risk.Central banks cannot ignore these risks. Nor should their actions reinforce market failures thatthreaten to slow down the decarbonisation objectives of the global community.The extent to which central banks should and can support the chorus of actions and commitmentsto limit the damages of global warming will also depend on whether, and how, climate risks –including physical and transition risks – may affect medium-term inflation dynamics as well ascentral banks’ ability to protect price stability against large and persistent climate shocks in thevicinity of the lower bound.In this context, further work is needed to assess whether climate risks will ultimately require astability-orientated central bank to react pre-emptively and help accelerate, within its mandate, thetransition toward a carbon-neutral economy.Thank you.[1]See also Schnabel, I. (2020), “Never waste a crisis: COVID-19, climate change and monetary policy”, speech at a virtualroundtable on “Sustainable Crisis Responses in Europe”, organised by the INSPIRE research network, 17 July.[2]See, for example, Guerreiro et al. (2018), “Future heat-waves, droughts and floods in 571 European cities”, Carbon Brief,21 February.[3]See Samset et al. (2020), “Delayed emergence of a global temperature response after emission mitigation”, NatureCommunications, Vol. 11, No 3261.[4]See, for example, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2015), OECD Economic Outlook, Issue 2,Chapter 2, “Cool Policy: Climate Change Mitigation Supporting Growth”.[5]See Kahn et al. (2019), “Long-Term Macroeconomic Effects of Climate Change: A Cross-Country Analysis”, IMF WorkingPaper, No 19/215.[6]See Ehlers et al. (2020), “Green bonds and carbon emissions: exploring the case for a rating system at the firm level”, BISQuarterly Review, September.[7]See Schnabel (2020, ibid.); and Kapraun, J. and Scheins, C. (2019), “(In)-Credibly Green: Which Bonds Trade at a GreenBond Premium?, Proceedings of Paris December 2019 Finance Meeting EUROFIDAI – ESSEC.[8]See, for example, Hong et al. (2019), “Climate risks and market efficiency,” Journal of Econometrics, Vol. 208(1), pp. 265-281.
29/09/2020When markets fail – the need for collective action in tackling climate changehttps://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2020/html/ecb.sp200928_1~268b0b672f.en.html7/7[9]The IMF, for example, estimates that a price of USD 75 would be required to limit global warming to 2°C or less; seeGaspar et al. (2019), “Fiscal Policies to Curb Climate Change”, IMF blog, 10 October.[10]Alessi L., Ossola E. and Panzica R., The Greenium matters: greenhouse gas emissions, environmental disclosures, andstock prices, European Commission – Joint Research Centre, Working Papers in Economics and Finance, 2020.[11]See European Commission (2018), “A Clean Planet for all – a European strategic long-term vision for a prosperous,modern, competitive and climate neutral economy”, COM (2018) 773.[12]See ECB and ESRB (2020), “Positively green: Measuring climate change risks to financial stability”, June.[13]See also Lagarde, C. (2020), “Climate change and the financial sector”, speech at the launch of the COP26 PrivateFinance Agenda, London, 27 February.[14]These figures refer to the investable free float.[15]See De Haas, R. and Popov, A. (2019), “Finance and carbon emissions”, Working Paper Series, No 2318, ECB, Frankfurtam Main; and ECB (2020), “Financial integration and structure in the euro area”, Frankfurt am Main, March.[16]See Hsu et al. (2014), “Financial development and innovation: Cross-country evidence”, Journal of Financial Economics,Vol. 112(1), pp. 116-135.[17]See Porter, M. E. (1991), “America’s Green Strategy”, Scientific American, No 264(4), p. 168; Porter, M. and van derLinde, C. (1995), “Toward a New Conception of the Environment-Competitiveness Relationship”, Journal of EconomicPerspectives, Vol. 9 (4), pp. 97-118; Rubashkina et al. (2015), “Environmental regulation and competitiveness: Empiricalevidence on the Porter Hypothesis from European manufacturing sectors”, Energy Policy, Vol. 83, pp. 288-300; and vanLeeuwen, G. and Mohnen, P. (2017), “Revisiting the Porter hypothesis: an empirical analysis of Green innovation for theNetherlands”, Economics of Innovation and New Technology, Vol. 26:1-2, pp. 63-77.[18]See also Enria, A. (2020), “ECB Banking Supervision’s approach to climate risks”, keynote speech at the EuropeanCentral Bank Climate and Environmental Risks Webinar, 17 June.[19]See Allen et al., “Climate-related scenarios for financial stability assessment: An application to France”, Banque deFrance Working Paper, forthcoming.[20]There have also been proposals for the ECB to introduce green TLTROs, providing banks with cheaper funding that lendin accordance with the European Commission’s taxonomy. See van ‘t Klooster, J. and van Tilburg, R. (2020), “Targeting asustainable recovery with Green TLTROs”, Positive Money Europe, September.[21]The share of green bonds in the corporate universe increased from 4% in 2018 to 5% today, or around €60 billion, out ofwhich the Eurosystem holds about 20%. In the sovereign bond space, green bonds account for around 1% of the universe, oraround €100 billion, of which the Eurosystem holds somewhat more than 20%.
Jens Weidmann: Welcome address for Christine LagardeWelcome address for Christine Lagarde by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the DeutscheBundesbank and Chair of the Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at theVirtual autumn conference “Banking and Payments in the Digital World”, Frankfurt am Main, 10September 2020.*   *   *1 IntroductionLadies and gentlemen,A very good evening or good morning – wherever you may be joining us from. Following on fromthis first highly instructive session at our autumn conference, it is now a great pleasure and aprivilege for me to welcome ECB President Christine Lagarde.Chère Christine,We are very grateful to you for joining us today. Last year, at your first press conference as ECBPresident, you said: “I’m neither dove nor hawk and my ambition is to be this owl that is oftenassociated with a little bit of wisdom”.I’m not here to take a deep dive into ornithology. But let me just say that, in the dark, where otherslose their bearings, owls have outstanding eyesight. And they have an excellent sense of hearing,too.2 Strategy review and crisis responseThat brings me back to your first press conference, where you stated that we should not just bepreaching the gospel that we think we master, but also listening to the views of those to whomwe are reaching out. Placing increased emphasis on listening to the public is undoubtedly one ofyour main achievements so far as ECB President. The ECB Listens Portal and the upcomingECB Listens event are key examples of the change in communication culture you have set inmotion, as is the reinvigorated spirit of collegiality in the Governing Council.But you have also launched a strategy review – with the ambition, from the outset, of leaving nostone unturned. Then the COVID-19 pandemic interfered with this in-depth process and, for goodreason, the conclusion of the strategy review was postponed. Combatting the coronavirus crisistook precedence.In a crisis of this kind, fiscal policy has to take the lead. Monetary policy is not in the driving seat.But providing ample liquidity to banks and keeping an expansionary monetary policy stance areimportant contributions, too. They help prevent the financial system from pushing the economyinto a downward spiral that would endanger price stability. Of course, one can take differentviews of how the specific monetary policy measures are designed. But undoubtedly theEurosystem’s determined response contributed to overcoming the economic fallout of thepandemic.3 ConclusionAnother achievement, and one that brings us to the subject matter of our conference, has beenthe establishment of a High-Level Task Force on Central Bank Digital Currency. The crisis mayhave changed the overarching agenda, but the topic of digital payment solutions is as cuttingedge as it ever was. 1 / 2BIS central bankers' speeches
Indeed, the pandemic has tilted consumer behaviour towards contactless payments. Whetherthis shift will be permanent remains to be seen. Also, the private initiatives to offer digital meansof payment, like the project launched by the Libra initiative, have been further advanced,highlighting the demand for an instantaneous, internet-ready means of payment and the need tokeep the payment systems that we central banks own up to speed. This notwithstanding, I amsure that cash will continue to be an important payment medium for the foreseeable future.One particularly interesting example of cash is the Greek €1 coin: its national side shows the Owlof Athena which was depicted on an ancient coin. The little owl associated with the goddessAthena became a symbol of wisdom – maybe the “little bit of wisdom” that you, Christine, werereferring to in your first press conference as ECB President. We are now impatient to hear whatyou have to say. Christine, the floor is yours.Thank you for your attention. 2 / 2BIS central bankers' speeches
  How central banks can use digitalisation to better serve the public: the case of payments Navigating the Digitalisation Transformation - Virtual OMFIF-Banque de France Seminar Pablo Hernández de Cos Governor       25.09.2020 
     1  Good morning, I would like to start off by expressing my gratitude to both the OMFIF and the Banque de France for organising this very interesting and, certainly, timely event. Like many of my esteemed colleagues, I have been vocal about the growing relevance of emerging technologies for the financial system before. In fact, at the Banco de España we are closely monitoring trends in order to fully understand their potential implications and be ready to act quickly, where necessary.  Yet despite all its recent history and significance, it is now -in the light of the pandemic- that digitalisation has become even more critical and, possibly, also a catalyst for a tectonic shift across multiple dimensions. Products, services, business models, distribution channels and touch points all over the industry may, indeed, be closer today to an accelerated reshaping than was the case only a few months ago.  If anything, these difficult times have, in my view, proven what a valuable ally digitalisation can be to strengthen banks’ resilience and secure the necessary flow of funds to society at large. This has been instrumental to mitigate some of the damage caused by the outbreak. More broadly, the virtualisation of our economic activity during the pandemic has further provided a necessary backstop for many businesses that used to rely solely on their physical presence. As such, digitalisation has once again proved to be not a goal in itself but rather a means to serve a much broader purpose, as it offers a novel toolkit to push out the boundaries of what has been possible in the past, allowing us to address well-known and often challenging problems in a convenient and much more effective manner.   Exploring the pros and cons of issuing a central bank digital currency (CBDC) Since the previous panel has already covered these COVID-related themes quite extensively, I would rather use my time to draw your attention to something different and yet equally important as a reflection of the impact of digitalisation. Hence, in the next few minutes I will comment on the way in which this transformational process echoes in a specific context, namely that of a central bank in its role as service provider, and the cross-cutting impact this may have on the broader ecosystem.  As in other realms, the large-scale adoption of new technologies is also likely to disrupt both the environment in which we, central banks, carry out our tasks and the choices we need to make on the best possible approach to those tasks. Indeed, this is true for all central banks’ functions and responsibilities. However, to illustrate this point, I will focus primarily on one that is attracting much interest lately: our role as the sole issuer of legal tender.    Ensuring adequate provision of a means of payment that is credit-risk free and fully and efficiently available and accessible to any potential user group is extremely important. To date, cash has been the only asset that enjoys legal tender status and has played this role. Yet, the way cash is fathomed and embraced nowadays is heavily influenced by the increasing digitalisation of society, and by technological change more generally.  For example, the behaviour, preferences and expectations of users are changing rapidly, as their experience with digital technologies grows. Novel payment alternatives, provided 
     2  either by private players (both traditional and non-traditional ones) or by public authorities in various jurisdictions, may also surface and/or expand, presenting greater appeal than traditional banknotes and coins. Moreover, new features of existing payment instruments or services, such as programmability, are now becoming possible thanks to emerging technologies. Therefore, besides ensuring the availability of cash, we also need to consider new ways of improving the efficiency of retail payments by leveraging digital technology more extensively. All of this could signal the need to broaden the approach and explore new opportunities, aiming to better address modern society’s unmet demands. In this process, the notion of a universally accessible CBDC stands out, that is, a new type of central bank digital liability that could be made widely available. A key aspect to underline is that a potential CBDC could coexist perfectly well with physical cash, which serves an important role and for which -at least in the euro area- there is still strong demand.1 In other words, traditional cash and a CBDC might be natural partners, rather than potential substitutes for each other as they are often presented.  However, before taking any major decision on the issue of a CBDC, several important questions need to be answered: What precise complementary roles would cash, bank accounts and digital coins play? Should central banks focus on securing a sound regulation that offers appropriate safeguards and leave the private sector to come up with viable alternatives? Or should we ensure the provision of a safe asset by issuing a CBDC?  As you can see, when faced with a case of practical use, even one as apparently simple as this, embracing the opportunities that new technologies offer is not always crystal clear. What’s more, when approaching this topic in more detail, many questions and far-reaching implications arise, thus suggesting the need to tread cautiously in unknown territory. I refer to the myriads of design and operational aspects, such as whether this “new digital cash” should preserve all the features of traditional banknotes and coins (for instance, anonymity), or whether some of the key processes such as Know Your Customer or compliance with AML requirements should remain in the hands of the private sector for efficiency reasons. In any event, uncertainties arise both about the degree of maturity of the different IT choices and the greater security risks they may entail. On top of this, we must also be aware that a CBDC may possibly bring with it some unwanted side effects, such as increased disintermediation of the financial sector by structurally eroding banks’ deposit base, lending capacity, and a greater risk of bank runs.  It is, therefore, our responsibility, first to apprehend what is at stake with our decisions, and then to determine the conditions and the scenarios in which a public digital currency offers the most benefits while minimising the drawbacks.                                                                                                1 Despite significant country-level differences, the Eurosystem payment study for 2019 (SPACE) revealed that electronic payments continued to increase their market share. In fact, for the euro area as a whole, cash was used in more than 70% of all payments at the point of sale. Moreover, the number and value of banknotes in circulation have also continued to rise uninterruptedly during the pandemic, for precautionary reasons (lower cash volumes were returned to the NCBs). The same holds true for other countries such as the United States (J. P. Konig, 2020) or Canada (Chen et al., 2020). Following the easing of lockdown measures, at end-May 2020 the annual rates of growth for the number and value of banknotes in circulation in the euro area were around 10%.  
     3  This certainly requires a strong commitment from us, placing a special emphasis on drawing conclusions based on sound research and analysis. In addition, and also importantly, it calls for our proactive engagement in a practical experimentation phase that can shed light on the nature and scale of the pain points, problems and underlying threats, and also on potential solutions.  That is why while the issuance of a digital euro is not foreseen in the immediate future, the Eurosystem has a keen interest to tackle the challenges arising from possible future scenarios. As you may know, many other central banks2 are already analysing this possibility. Along these lines, you may have already heard about the tests that the People’s Bank of China is currently carrying out in a number of provinces, or the extensive work that preceded the well-publicised e-krona pilot in Sweden. You may also be aware of the Fed’s recent announcement of its intention to remain on the frontier of research and policy development regarding CBDCs.3. As ECB President Lagarde mentioned a few weeks ago,4 earlier this year the Eurosystem decided to set up a taskforce to explore the benefits, risks and operational challenges of introducing a digital euro. The results of this work will soon be shared publicly. However, this is only the first step in a more profound reflection that still has to take place.  In this sense, I am convinced that in order to deliver a successful roadmap for the potential issuance of a digital euro, we must establish a certain set of priorities upfront. Allow me to be a bit more precise in this respect.  To start with, I believe we should deepen the current standing of our work. This means not just promoting a wide-ranging exchange of views within the Eurosystem and with other European authorities and institutions, but also engaging other relevant stakeholders in our discussions, including the private sector and academia. In my view, it is this active dialogue that will help us understand the full range of implications of a CBDC and the minimum requirements that a euro-denominated CBDC should meet. Furthermore, as I mentioned earlier, I believe we need to place a strong emphasis on developing a rigorous experimentation agenda that will help us make informed policy decisions about the different design options. This entails identifying the key questions that remain open and need to be further analysed by means of hands-on experience, and formulating the corresponding concrete testing proposals. And we must bear in mind that private agents could be instrumental for the ultimate success of this exercise, so it is important that we make sure to count them in early on. Lastly, international cooperation with other central banks needs to remain high on the agenda, to identify best practice, avoid unnecessary fragmentation and help achieve                                                                                               2 According to Boar et al. (2020), as of late 2019 central banks representing a fifth of the world’s population reported that they were likely to issue CBDCs very soon. [https://www.bis.org/publ/bppdf/bispap107.pdf]  3 “An Update on Digital Currencies”, a speech by Governor Lael Brainard at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, August 2020. [https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/brainard20200813a.htm] 4 “Payments in a digital world”, a speech by Christine Lagarde at the Deutsche Bundesbank online conference on banking and payments in the digital world, September 2020.  [https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2020/html/ecb.sp200910~31e6ae9835.en.html] 
     4  interoperability across borders. In this sense, I believe the role of international organisations and standard-setters, such as the BIS in its role as a hub for central banks, could prove essential.  Cross-border payments: another topic of growing interest Regardless of its importance, expanding access to a central bank’s balance sheet by making a CBDC available to households and non-financial corporations is only one of many ways in which technological innovation may help enhance the monetary and payment system. Indeed, given how dynamic the payments market is nowadays, we need to keep abreast of and closely monitor any private initiatives that may overlap in the field of action of a CBDC. This is because they may ultimately prove to be equally viable options for achieving the same goals or remedying some of the common and long-standing shortcomings that traditional channels have faced. In that respect, the current landscape of evolving market infrastructures poses several telling examples, but in the interest of time I will concentrate today on one particular area, namely payments that have a multi-country dimension.  Cross-jurisdictional payments enjoy growing interest all over the world, not only because of their potential as a test bed for new technologies, but also due to the growing relevance of e-commerce, international trade and migration.5 Indeed, according to the CPMI Chair, Sir Jon Cunliffe, global financial transfers amounted to well over $20 trillion in 2019 and are expected to hit $30 trillion by 2022.6 Other aspects, such as addressing front-end fragmentation in the common market, swiftly achieving a greater scale and securing stronger European governance, also explain why this topic is becoming an increasing concern for the euro area.  Given their differences both in scope and goals I think it is best, for the sake of clarity, if I walk you through these various projects one by one. Starting with the latter case, I would like to mention the recent decision by 16 major European banks in various Member States to launch the European Payment Initiative or EPI. This project builds on the success of the Single Euro Payments Area -SEPA- which laid the foundations for a truly cohesive cashless euro payments space and has made an essential contribution to the efficiency and competitiveness of the European economy. However, despite all the efforts, SEPA fell short in delivering full integration at the point of sale, thus leaving the door open for alternative proposals such as the EPI. By leveraging their large market share, the EPI promoters aim to deploy a unified payment solution for consumers and merchants across Europe, encompassing a payment card and a digital wallet to cover all potential uses at the point of                                                                                               5 Some figures that show the growing relevance of these elements are: a) 15%-20% of e-commerce transaction value is already international; b) international tourist arrivals worldwide grew by 53% from 2010 to 2019; c) annual remittance flows have grown by 50% in the ten years since 2010, to reach $707 billion; and d) between 2008 and 2018 the value of merchandise trade exports increased by 20% and the value of exports of commercial services by 46%. Source: “Enhancing Cross-border Payments - Stage 1 report to the G20: Technical background report”, Financial Stability Board, April 2020. [https://www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/P090420-2.pdf] 6 "Cross-border payment systems have been neglected for too long", J. Cunliffe, July 2020, Financial Times. [https://www.bis.org/cpmi/speeches/sp200730.htm] 
     5  interaction: in-store, online, person-to-person and cash withdrawals. To further increase its appeal, settlement will be instant, via SEPA instant credit transfer. From a Eurosystem perspective, the EPI highlights how market players can work together efficiently in the pursuit of a common objective, and harness technology to transform the payments landscape in line with their private interests and also our public strategy. Central banks need to closely follow the progress of any such initiatives and, where necessary, consider the need to take action should such market failures persist.  On a different yet related note, international cross-border payment arrangements are another compelling case study on how to bring this specific domain into the 21st century. Despite not yet being overwhelmingly disrupted by digital innovations, their flaws have recently come under the spotlight thanks to initiatives such as Libra which have clearly targeted this market segment with the promise to overcome its present weaknesses. Indeed, as attested by the recent Financial Stability Board (FSB)7 and Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures (CPMI)8 reports to the G20, cross-border payments still suffer from a number of long-standing frictions which hamper global trade, development and economic growth. These include, in particular, legacy technology platforms, limited operating hours and onerous compliance checks, alongside other relevant aspects such as high funding costs, weak competition or an insufficient degree of standardisation. In this light it comes as no surprise that this issue is one of the top priorities on the G20 strategic agenda for 2020. Accordingly, since last December, the FSB and the CPMI, with the support of other international organisations, have been working together on defining the necessary building blocks to deliver a global roadmap that can help achieve the required structural improvements.9 Interestingly, this reform programme, a combination of practical steps and indicative time frames, does not hinge only on technological developments. Rather, it encourages combining these new technologies with more traditional measures and advocates establishing a sound shared vision as a first step in the laying of the necessary foundations.10 This implies that to really achieve a profound transformation, an ambitious range of actions is required, beyond the mere operational or technical aspects, like the development of international guidelines, improvement of surveillance practices or the removal of obstacles to the exchange of data, just to name a few. Nevertheless, the importance of digital technology in this context should not be underplayed, even though its full potential may only be realised in the long run. Indeed, it is worth mentioning that a number of the enhancements foreseen as part of this action plan                                                                                               7 “Enhancing Cross-border Payments: Stage 1 report to the G20”, Financial Stability Board, April 2020. [https://www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/P090420-1.pdf] 8  “Enhancing cross-border payments: building blocks of a global roadmap: Stage 2 report to the G20”, Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures, CPMI Papers, No 193, July 2020. [https://www.bis.org/cpmi/publ/d193.pdf]  9 See footnote 8. 10 Indeed, one such measure is devoted to the potential issuance of a CBDC/stablecoins. This underlines my key message, i.e. that emerging technologies offer us an opportunity to address old problems in novel and, eventually, more effective ways. 
     6  are ultimately designed to help knock down some of the existing barriers to the emergence of new cross-border payment infrastructures and arrangements.  Conclusion I would like to conclude by sharing some final thoughts with you. After all we have heard today, I think it is safe to say that none of us disputes the idea that digital technologies are at the very heart of all serious present-day attempts to achieve any kind of sustainable, cutting-edge innovation. Moreover, in the aftermath of COVID-19, it is fair to expect that the financial services industry will have no choice but to continue to navigate the unchartered waters of digital transformation, on the lookout for a safe harbour that will provide shelter and, hopefully, a gateway to a booming market place.  As central bankers with a clear public policy agenda and mandate, we cannot refrain from meeting our obligations in this context. Consequently, as the need for a major makeover becomes more pressing, I believe that financial authorities should take a proactive stance towards digital innovation. We should do so by striking the right balance between responsible parties, assignments and the necessary guardrails whilst ensuring optimal provision of what the BIS General Manager Agustín Carstens likes to call “central bank public goods”. For this reason, central banks must try to stay ahead of the curve and be ready to embrace experimentation and research on these topics as soon as possible, while building bridges with all the relevant stakeholders and closely scrutinising the progress that their initiatives achieve in related fields. Only this strategy will pay dividends in the long run and pave the way for a future that best serves the needs and maximises the welfare of our society.  The sixteenth President of the United States of America, Abraham Lincoln, once said that the best way to predict the future was to create it. As I see it, today, digital technologies are bringing this vision one step closer to becoming a reality. Thank you for your attention. 
For release on delivery 2:00 p.m. EDT   September 23, 2020         Optimism in the Time of COVID  Remarks by  Randal K. Quarles  Vice Chair for Supervision  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System  at  2020 Virtual D.C. Summit   Institute of International Bankers       Washington, D.C. (via webcast)        September 23, 2020      
 - 2 - I want to thank the Institute of International Bankers for inviting me to discuss the outlook for the global and U.S. economies at what I believe is an important juncture in the evolution of what I refer to as the “COVID event”: the outbreak of COVID-19 and the government and social response to it.   First, I will discuss the global economy before turning to our domestic economy and its outlook.  From there, I will discuss my views on monetary policy, including the new long-run monetary policy strategy recently announced by the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC).  And I will wrap up with a brief discussion on financial stability and regulatory issues.   International Economic Conditions Let me start with a picture of the global economy.  Although challenges remain, especially among some emerging market economies, significant support to households and businesses from central banks and fiscal authorities has contributed to a strong rebound in a number of advanced and some emerging Asian economies since those countries began to loosen restrictions.  In these economies, the reopening of factories has led to a resurgence of industrial production.  Retail sales are rebounding and in some countries are already above levels seen before the COVID event.  However, international trade has been slower to increase.     The extent of the recovery in some jurisdictions has been surprisingly robust compared to many analysts’ expectations earlier this year.  The momentum is feeding into many private-sector forecasts that suggest prospects are good for strong economic growth in the United States and other advanced economies over the rest of this year and 
 - 3 - next.  However, the hole that countries are in remains deep, and significant downside risks still exist.   Perhaps the most discussed risk has been that a “second wave” of the virus could trigger a return to widespread mobility restrictions and business closures.  Several countries, including some portions of the United States, have seen a substantial resurgence of infections in recent months.  This has been accompanied, however, by substantially lower hospitalization and death rates in most cases, and so far most countries have been able to address the resurgence without reinstituting severe restrictive practices.  Mobility indexes have been little changed in Europe and the United States, and the declines in Asia have been modest.1  Businesses—which have adjusted operations and, in some cases, changed business models—seem much better adapted to remaining open.  I am also hopeful that better testing, tracing, and treatment regimens, as well as improved understanding by the public about how to manage the risks of the disease, will allow firms, individuals, and governments to address public concerns about the virus while avoiding a second severe downturn or a protracted stagnation. Still, the economic fortunes of households and businesses around the world remain at risk.  Incomes and employment are likely to lag below pre-COVID event levels for some time, which would put stress on the finances of many families.  Some people may remain reluctant to return to full engagement in social and economic life, weighing especially on the service sector.  Even with support from monetary and fiscal policy, large numbers of businesses may close.  These closures may lead to some longer-term scarring of the economy through lower investment, reduced capacity, and long-term                                                  1 Mobility indexes, which measure how much people move around outside their homes using cellphone geolocation data, tend to vary with economic activity. 
 - 4 - unemployment leading some to drop out of the labor force altogether.  While I am optimistic that recovery is underway and the worst outcomes can be avoided, these concerns suggest that policymakers around the world need to remain watchful and ready to act further. Domestic Economic Conditions and the Outlook Now let me focus on U.S. economic conditions and the outlook.  The historic collapse in economic activity in March and April will take time to reverse.  However, the economy has rebounded more strongly than almost any forecaster expected.  That resilience reflects the economy’s underlying strength upon entering the recession and demonstrates its inherent flexibility, as well as the dynamism of the American people.  For example, the Census Bureau reports that applications by people seeking to start new businesses have surged this summer.2   The median of projections for 2020 by FOMC participants in September showed that both gross domestic product (GDP) and inflation had been revised up significantly from the median in the June projections.3  I expect that robust GDP growth over the rest of this year and in 2021 will lead to strong employment gains and move inflation closer to 2 percent.  I would still caution that there is an unusually large amount of uncertainty now about any outlook, and I see the risks to the outlook as weighted to the downside.  However, given the trends I previously discussed in the way countries are adjusting to the                                                  2 See the “Business Formation Statistics” page on the Census Bureau’s website at https://www.census.gov/econ/bfs/index.html. 3 The advance release of table 1 of the Summary of Economic Projections, which will be issue with the minutes of the September 2020 FOMC meeting, is available on the Board’s website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomcprojtabl20200916.htm. 
 - 5 - COVID event, I am optimistic that the United States can avoid the highly adverse outcomes that many feared would materialize.   Turning now to the labor market, unemployment was still at 8.4 percent in August and the labor force participation rate still down significantly from February.  The extraordinary package of fiscal support in the CARES Act (Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act) helped to support household incomes and to offset the effect of the huge job losses in March and April.  But the act’s unemployment provisions have expired, and most of the businesses that received Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) loans report that they have exhausted those funds.4  In addition, one area where increased understanding of the disease has, in many places, not led to general changes in practice is in the widespread school closures this fall.  Many parents with children will be forced to work less, or not at all, which is going to be a hardship for them and weigh on the economy.  So, I agree with Chair Powell that it will take continued support to sustain a robust recovery.   Although still unacceptably high, an 8.4 percent unemployment rate represents a considerable improvement from 14.7 percent in April and is already much lower than many thought possible this year.5  By comparison, after the onset of the Great Recession, it took more than two years to reduce unemployment from the peak of 10 percent to 8.4 percent.  One reason for the faster turnaround this time is that many of the initial job                                                  4 See Goldman Sachs (2020), “Survey:  Disappointed and Frustrated, Small Business Owners Feel Left Behind by Congress” (New York:  Goldman Sachs, September 8), https://www.goldmansachs.com/citizenship/10000-small-businesses/US/infographic-left-behind/index.html. 5 Accounting for employees who still were being paid but not working during April, the Bureau of Labor Statistics believes that the peak unemployment rate may have been about 5 percentage points higher than 14.7 percent.  However, this measurement issue has decreased significantly to less than 1 percent in the most recent month.  
 - 6 - losses, and subsequent job gains, were due to temporary disruptions that many businesses have overcome.  However, some indicators point to slower improvement in the job market going forward.   Like employment, consumer spending has been much stronger than expected, even though spending on travel and many other categories of in-person services remains depressed.  Retail sales were extremely strong from May through August, driven by demand for consumer durables such as automobiles, furniture, and home improvement.  Home sales and construction also have increased sharply since then.  For instance, new home sales rose in July to an annual pace of over 900,000 units, which is 16 percent above the recent peak in January 2020 and the fastest pace since December 2006.6   All of these facts lead me to believe the momentum in household spending is strong.  Although consumer confidence remains lower than early this year, the resilience in big-ticket purchases indicates some underlying confidence among households that the economy will continue to improve.  The strength in the consumer and housing sectors is being supported by Fed action to lower interest rates and support credit availability for creditworthy borrowers.  In addition, the recent high rate of household savings likely represents a significant source of pent-up demand.   Now let me turn to the business sector, where the picture is more mixed.  As in the household sector, the decline in many measures of business spending last spring turned out to be much less than was feared, and some indicators of business investment have turned around dramatically in recent months.  However, there is considerable                                                  6 See Census Bureau (2020), “Monthly New Residential Sales, July 2020,” Release CB20-123, August 25, https://www.census.gov/construction/nrs/pdf/newressales.pdf. 
 - 7 - uncertainty over how businesses will deal with the cumulative effects of the COVID event on the economy.   As we all know, medium and small enterprises were, and continue to be, heavily affected by the COVID event.  The PPP disbursed $525 billion in loans to businesses through August 8, most of which will be forgiven when businesses are found to have met the requirements for keeping workers on the job at previous pay rates.7  Working with the Treasury Department, the Federal Reserve created several facilities that are providing support to large, mid-size, and small firms.8  These programs have improved credit market functioning through direct support to borrowers and lenders that use them and indirect support by creating a backstop against worsening conditions that boosts the willingness of private-sector lenders to extend credit.   Despite those efforts and the pickup in household spending, many businesses are still under strain, representing an important source of downside risk.  One concern is that many businesses already were highly leveraged going into the crisis, and taking on more debt as a bridge until commerce normalizes may not be a viable option, even with favorable repayment terms.  Many corporate bonds and leveraged syndicated loans were downgraded between March and June, and default rates on corporate bonds rose significantly over that period as well.  However, corporate defaults have slowed in the                                                  7 See U.S. Small Business Administration (2020), Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) Report (Washington:  SBA, August), https://www.sba.gov/sites/default/files/2020-08/PPP_Report%20-%202020-08-10.pdf. 8 Specifically, the following facilities were created:  the PPP Liquidity Facility, as well as the Commercial Paper Funding Facility, the Primary Market Corporate Credit Facility, the Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facility, and the Main Street Lending Program.  See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020), Report on Outstanding Lending Facilities Authorized by the Board under Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act (Washington:  Board of Governors, July 31), p. 3, https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/files/pdcf-mmlf-pmccf-smccf-talf-ppplf-mslp-20200803.pdf.  
 - 8 - past couple of months, and, so far, delinquency rates on business loans at banks have increased only marginally.  This development, in part, highlights banks’ ability to work with borrowers that have been hurt by the COVID event as laid out in supervisory guidance provided by the federal banking agencies.9   Another downside risk in the business sector is the strains to commercial real estate (CRE), particularly in retail and hospitality properties.  CRE was a prominent concern before COVID, although one that seemed quite manageable.  Since then, vacancy rates have risen significantly and rents have fallen sharply, putting at risk the high valuations that our May Financial Stability Report flagged as a vulnerability.10   The sharp decrease in output and employment, as well as continued slack in the economy, have put downward pressure on wages and the prices of goods and services affected by the COVID event.  The 12-month increase in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) dropped to about 0.5 percent in April.  Although the recovery since then has helped prices retrace some of those declines, PCE inflation was still only 1 percent for the 12 months ended in July and is likely to end 2020 well below our 2 percent longer-run target.11   Indicators of future inflation do not point to rapid acceleration.  Market measures of inflation expectations decreased sharply earlier this year before recovering to their previous levels recently, and inflation expectations in some surveys of professional                                                  9 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020), “Agencies Provide Additional Information to Encourage Financial Institutions to Work with Borrowers Affected by COVID-19,” press release, March 22, https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/bcreg20200322a.htm. 10 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020), Financial Stability Report (Washington:  Board of Governors, May), https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/files/financial-stability-report-20200515.pdf. 11 The FOMC defines inflation at the rate of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price index for PCE, as most consistent over the longer run with the Federal Reserve’s statutory mandate. 
 - 9 - forecasters have ticked down.  The Committee will be closely watching for a further recovery of inflation and signs that inflation expectations remain well anchored as we set monetary policy. Monetary Policy, Short Term and Longer Term In the near term, with both employment and inflation significantly short of the FOMC’s economic goals, the prescription is for a sustained aggressive use of monetary policy to support the economy.  In March, the FOMC cut the federal funds rate effectively to zero and began purchasing large quantities of Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities.  Over the following weeks, the Federal Reserve Board used our emergency authority to establish 13 lending facilities to provide support to households, financial firms, nonfinancial businesses, nonprofit organizations, and municipal governments.  We also took steps, including extending dollar swap lines to other central banks, to address strains in global dollar funding markets.  Taking a step back, beginning in 2019, the FOMC undertook a public review of the conceptual framework for how we approach monetary policy.  And last month, the FOMC updated its Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, which I will call the “consensus statement.”12   I want to emphasize the very public and deliberative nature of this policy review under the leadership of Chair Powell and Vice Chair Richard Clarida.  Through a series of 15 public Fed Listens events, we received input from a broad spectrum of people:                                                   12 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020), “Federal Open Market Committee Announces Approval of Updates to Its Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy,” press release, August 27, https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20200827a.htm. 
 - 10 - small business leaders, union workers, retirees, prominent outside researchers, and others.13  The FOMC also had the benefit of extensive research and analysis from Fed staff and debated the issues at a series of FOMC meetings.14  This process set a new and very high standard for transparency and accountability for the Fed, and we have committed to conducting such reviews roughly every five years.  I believe the new consensus statement lays out a strategy that is suited to the demands of setting monetary policy in our constantly changing economy.  Let me begin by focusing on two key conclusions.  First, over the past two decades, the prevailing level of interest rates in many advanced economies has declined, leaving central bankers with less room to cut interest rates when the economy slows.  In addition, experience over the past few decades has shown us that the traditionally strong relationship between unemployment and inflation has weakened, perhaps considerably.15  We saw this weakening relationship in the United States, as the robust expansion before the COVID event led to historic and broad-based labor market gains.  Not only did the unemployment rate drop to long-time lows, but the wages of low- and moderate-income workers also                                                  13 Federal Reserve staff analysis on the Fed Listens initiative was presented and discussed at the December 2019 FOMC meeting and is part of the Fed Listens report; see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020), Fed Listens:  Perspectives from the Public (Washington:  Board of Governors, June), https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/files/fedlistens-report-20200612.pdf. 14 Summaries of the Committee’s discussions are available in the minutes of the associated meetings, which can be found on the Board’s website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.  An overview of the System staff’s work in support of the review is presented in David Altig, Jeff Fuhrer, Marc P. Giannoni, and Thomas Laubach (2020), “The Federal Reserve’s Review of Its Monetary Policy Framework:  A Roadmap,” FEDS Notes (Washington:  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August 27), https://www.federalreserve.gov/econres/notes/feds-notes/the-federal-reserves-review-of-its-monetary-policy-framework-a-roadmap-20200827.htm.   15 A comprehensive review of both of these points can be found in Chair Powell’s 2020 speech at Jackson Hole; see Jerome H. Powell (2020), “New Economic Challenges and the Fed’s Monetary Policy Review,” speech delivered at “Navigating the Decade Ahead:  Implications for Monetary Policy,” an economic policy symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 27, https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/powell20200827a.htm.  
 - 11 - accelerated, and unemployment rates for historically disadvantaged groups fell to record lows.  Yet inflation continued to run modestly below our symmetric 2 percent target, for almost the entire period, and long-term interest rates remained very low by historical standards.16  This recent experience in the United States, which has also played out elsewhere, has led to a growing consensus in the economics profession that the relationship between unemployment and inflation—commonly known as the Phillips curve—has flattened.  Therefore, given the considerable benefits that we observed when unemployment fell to very low levels in recent years, the Committee determined that a low unemployment rate, unless accompanied by worrisome developments in inflation or other risks that could impede the attainment of our goals, would not necessitate a policy response.  We capture this change in the revised consensus statement by tying future policy decisions to “shortfalls of employment from its maximum level” rather than to “deviations” from the maximum level as in the previous statement.  The new framework statement also highlights that the maximum level of employment is a broad-based and inclusive goal, and it reiterates that the Committee will review a wide range of indicators—not just the unemployment rate—in its assessments of that level.  I believe these changes to the way the FOMC responds to labor market conditions will result in a stronger economy without jeopardizing our commitment to low and stable inflation.  In fact, I think that meeting our longer-run goal of 2 percent inflation as defined by the 12-                                                 16 A similar experience played out in the 1990s, as the Federal Reserve under Chairman Alan Greenspan  saw unemployment decline to levels well below then-prevailing views of maximum employment, without a significant increase in inflation or unmooring of inflation expectations.  
 - 12 - month change in the overall PCE price index, which is unchanged by this revision, will help achieve the kind of labor market outcomes we have experienced in recent years. And that is a good segue into the other major change in the consensus statement that I want to address today.  Even before the COVID event pushed inflation down to very low levels this year, PCE inflation had been running modestly below 2 percent for some time, and some measures of inflation expectations had decreased to the low ends of their historical ranges.  These developments certainly bear watching, especially if inflation were to remain lower than it had been in previous years or if inflation expectations were to decrease further.  A decrease in inflation expectations can lead to a downward spiral in actual inflation, which would further reduce already low equilibrium nominal interest rates and, among other consequences, leave the FOMC with less flexibility to address future economic slowdowns. In order to better anchor long-run inflation expectations at 2 percent, the consensus statement makes a distinct change from the old approach.  The Committee will seek to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time, which means that we will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time following periods when inflation has been persistently below 2 percent. In the previous consensus statement, the FOMC committed to a 2 percent longer-run goal for inflation that was to be “symmetric.”  This wording already suggested some tolerance for inflation above 2 percent when it was consistent with meeting our employment mandate, and I certainly never viewed 2 percent inflation as a ceiling.  One reason to be comfortable with inflation at times running moderately above 2 percent is that defining and measuring inflation are very much an inexact science.  For that reason, I 
 - 13 - have always considered alternative indicators of inflation—such as the Dallas Fed trimmed mean and, of course, core inflation—in my assessment of the likely longer-run path for the headline PCE price index.  As a result, as long as inflation expectations remain well anchored close to 2 percent, modest deviations of any particular measure of inflation around 2 percent are not a first-order concern in my decision framework.  In fact, I likely will be even more patient in reacting to small upward deviations, given the Committee’s move to focus on shortfalls of employment from maximum employment rather than deviations. For those reasons, I supported the action that the FOMC took last week at our September meeting to update the forward guidance to be consistent with the consensus statement for these extraordinary times.  Although we have seen the beginnings of a strong recovery, even optimistic forecasts suggest that it will take a long time to recover fully from this shock.  Evidence suggests that our actions to date have had significant stimulative effects.  By providing additional monetary policy accommodation through stronger, outcomes-based forward guidance, the Committee hopes to quicken the pace of the recovery.     Implications for Banks and Financial Stability   Now let us consider some of the implications of the COVID event for banks and for financial stability.  Large U.S. banks entered this crisis in strong condition, and the Federal Reserve has taken a number of important steps to help bolster banks’ resilience.  We took the unprecedented step of prohibiting share repurchases in the third quarter for 
 - 14 - large banks while also capping dividends.17  In addition, we required all banks to reassess their capital needs in the face of continued uncertainty and resubmit their capital plans.  Last week, we released a baseline and two hypothetical recession scenarios that will be used by banks and the Fed to assess the resilience of the sector, and we will release bank-specific results from our independent assessment before the end of the year.18  Nonbank financial firms, especially those engaged in liquidity transformation, experienced acute strains in March.  Despite the apparent success of some nonbank regulatory reforms in the United States, such as efforts to increase the resilience of money funds, the Board of Governors again needed to provide significant emergency support.  This is why, at the Financial Stability Board, I have put together a senior group of market regulators and central bank governors to develop a holistic review of the March stresses in nonbank finance.  We will deliver that review to the G20 in November, together with a work plan on potential methods to address the vulnerabilities that may amplify stresses in funding markets.   Conclusion In conclusion, the COVID event was an enormous economic shock in the first half of 2020, but a recovery is underway, and the world seems to be adjusting in ways that allow us to address public concerns about the virus without sudden stops in economic activity.  A full recovery is still a good way off, however, and risks remain weighted to the downside.  Policymakers will need to remain vigilant.                                                  17 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020), “Federal Reserve Board Releases Results of Stress Tests for 2020 and Additional Sensitivity Analyses Conducted in Light of the Coronavirus Event,” press release, June 25, https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/bcreg20200625c.htm. 18 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020), “Federal Reserve Board Releases Hypothetical Scenarios for Second Round of Bank Stress Tests,” press release, September 17, https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/bcreg20200917a.htm. 
            I am grateful to Stefan Claus, Henry Murdoch, David Gayle, Mark Cornelius, Giorgis Hadzilacos, Patrick Cleary and Megan Bell for their assistance preparing this speech.    All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice 1      Paving the way forward:  Managing climate risk in the insurance sector  Speech given by Anna Sweeney, Executive Director, Insurance Supervision Division  Delivered at the Moody’s Insurance Summit Webinar: The resilience of Insurers in a Changing Climate  9 September 2020   
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice 2  2   Introduction  Good morning everyone. I would like to thank Moody’s for inviting me to speak on climate change: one of the most significant and urgent risks facing the whole of the economy, today and for decades to come. As such, a major issue across the financial services sector; but given today’s audience, I shall concentrate on the insurance side.   With the pandemic, we are living through a systemic risk with major impacts on the real economy and consequently the financial services sector.  While it is hoped Covid-19 will eventually run its course – and hopefully sooner if a vaccine is found – the impact and risks from climate change will be felt for decades to come. And although, insurers have demonstrated resilience to Covid-19 - with the sector remaining robust to downside stresses created by the pandemic1 - the resilience and successful adaption of the industry to the longer term threat of climate change is likely to be a longer challenge.2   Insurance companies play a critical role in supporting businesses manage climate-related risks and provide critical long-term finance, such as infrastructure, that support economic growth.  Consequently, the resilience and the ability to manage climate-related risks within the insurance industry is of significant importance.   As a prudential regulator, our primary concern is to ensure the industry remains resilient to down-side stresses.  The complexity, global nature and time-horizon of climate risks require greater collaboration in developing and enhancing the industry’s risk management in this area.  Today I will set out the key issues that we see in managing climate risk – setting out our expectations for life and general insurers as well as explaining how the Bank of England is using its position to help developments in this area.  First, I will spend some time on how the risk affects the sector.  Climate change and defining climate-related financial risks  Climate related risks are most often described in terms of physical and transition risk.  With physical risks referring to the risks arising from more frequent extreme weather events such as floods and long-term trends such as the rise in sea-level; and transition risks arising from the process of adjustment towards a  lower-carbon economy. There is a third risk that underlies these two that is especially important for insurers: liability risk. This refers to risks that could arise for insurance firms from parties who have suffered loss from climate change – for example from firms misreading the transition risk, or who have suffered the                                                       1 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/financial-stability-report/2020/august-2020.pdf?la=en&hash=2D820EFD16973AF9CB27F1C29507E0D55E03E1F5  2 The PRA’s ‘The impact of climate change on the UK insurance sector’ (2015) highlighted that the potential for climate change to present substantial risks to the business model of insurers. https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/prudential-regulation/publication/impact-of-climate-change-on-the-uk-insurance-sector.pdf  
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice 3  3   consequences of physical risk, and then seek to recover those losses from others who they believe may have been responsible.  Before I continue, it is worth reiterating the dramatic scale of global warming, rising sea levels, and extreme weather events. The ten hottest years ever recorded have all occurred since 1998 – and the current signs are that 2020 will be no different. Despite some fluctuations, the evidence is clear that Earth’s climate is warming rapidly, and the pace of change is increasing.   In May 2020,3 the concentration of carbon dioxide (CO2) in our atmosphere increased to the highest level ever recorded in human history. This is likely higher than at any point in the last three million years, and it occurred during the middle of an economy-wide lockdown.   Indeed, more than half of the CO2 emitted into the atmosphere by the burning of fossil fuels has occurred in just the past three decades. The temporary relief in emissions growth due to the pandemic lockdown measures will not be enough to reduce the overall concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere, and is likely to be short-lived4. By contrast, avoiding the very worst physical impacts will require permanent changes to the way we live and do business; we will need to reorient.  The Government has already announced its intention for the UK to produce net zero CO2 emissions by 2050 and that will require considerable changes to the way we currently work and live.  Moreover, the UN climate conference, COP26 (Conference of the Parties), is due to take place between 1 and 12 November 2021 in Glasgow, in partnership with Italy.5  As hosts, the UK will continue to work with our Italian partners to increase climate action, build resilience and lower emissions. The steps agreed at COP26 could have a profound impact on our societies’ future.  Impact to insurers from losses related to climate change  Where global average temperatures have risen in the past, incidences of climate-related weather events tended to become both more common and more severe. Insurers protect society against these risks, and these events will continue to become more expensive for the industry.  The insurance industry is, of course, used to dealing with losses from physical risks.                                                         3 https://www.climate.gov/news-features/understanding-climate/climate-change-atmospheric-carbon-dioxide 4 Forster, P.M., Forster, H.I., Evans, M.J. et al. Current and future global climate impacts resulting from COVID-19. Nat. Clim. Chang. (2020). “we estimate that the direct effect of the pandemic-driven response will be negligible, with a cooling of around 0.01 ± 0.005 °C by 2030 compared to a baseline scenario that follows current national policies.” 5 https://www.ukcop26.org/  
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice 4  4   For example, recent research suggests that the frequency of climatic natural disasters has grown as much as threefold since 1980.6 Despite such an increase, the industry has managed to demonstrate resilience and innovation in diversifying the risk thus far.  However, there is now concern whether further deterioration of extreme climatic events might result in an increase in the protection gap.   Physical, transition and liability risks  In the short-term physical risks arise from increased weather-related events such as floods, wildfires and storms, and longer-term through events such as sea level rise and chronic heat waves.  And to illustrate how these risks could change: in last year’s PRA Insurance Stress Test, feedback indicated that in a potential extreme physical climate change scenario, a 1-in-100 year loss in future may exceed today's 1-in-1,000 year loss. To put this into numbers, if today’s UK flood 100 year event industry loss is in the order of £7bn; then in the future, that figure might more than double. For firms whose capital requirements are materially determined on extreme natural catastrophe scenarios, the sensitivity of tail events and hence cost and availability of insurance as a result of physical climate change is not hard to imagine.  Furthermore, as the Thai Floods in 2011 illustrate, physical risks can reach beyond the immediate impact of natural catastrophes. For example, the Lloyd’s market faced a $2.2 billion7 claim from businesses not directly impacted by the floods – instead losses arose from business interruption as supply chains were badly disrupted.   Understanding such changes will be important not only to insurers and regulators but also Governments and societies in adapting and ensuring continued resilience.  The second area of financial risk for insurers is on investments.  The value of investments is not only at risk from physical damage to property, but also through the disruption of a normal working of the economy - affecting corporate profits and hence a wider range of assets.  In extreme circumstances, they could affect the value of sovereign debt.  Transition risks arise from the process of adjustment towards a lower-carbon economy.  In order to make that transition, there will have to be new government policies, changes to customer preferences, and the introduction of new technologies. These will have an impact on the value of financial assets. Indeed, there is a real risk that some of the long-term assets that life insurers hold to support future pension benefits could                                                       6 Source: Authors’ estimates based on data from the Emergency Event Database of the Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters. https://www.emdat.be (accessed 7 September 2020) 7 https://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-lloydsoflondon/lloyds-faces-third-biggest-loss-from-thai-flood-idUKTRE81D0C420120214 
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice 5  5   substantially fall in value. Understanding the longer term strategy of an insurer’s most significant investments will be needed to fully understand the potential effect of transition and physical risks.  Finally, there is one other category of risk, albeit this is frequently considered as a subset of the other two: climate-related litigation and climate legal liability risk.   Climate lawsuits are increasing globally, often occurring in multiple jurisdictions and arising from a variety of different causes. The potential scope for this type of litigation is broad, and firms all over the world are already beginning to be litigated against for their participation in and/or failure to meaningfully prevent manmade climate change. This could lead to significant financial consequences.   While current evidence on the impact of these litigation cases is speculative (as climate litigation remains an evolving area which varies considerably across the world), we are looking into the potential consequences of successful rulings to increase in the future, with perhaps one or two ‘landmark’ cases paving the way for these subsequent successes. As the climate emergency continues to evolve, institutions of all types could face increased risk of climate litigation, whether directly via actual case rulings, or indirectly, by providing coverage or credit to exposed corporate counterparties.  How should insurers respond?  With global assets under management of more than $13 trillion8, and premiums of $6.3 trillion9, the insurance sector has a substantial and unique role to play in helping to safeguard society against significant climate change.   The consideration of climate risk is not new to insurers and many firms have been thinking about the nature of these risks for some time. This is perhaps because many of the capabilities involved in managing climate change risk are innately related to the insurance business model, particularly for property insurance.   On the General Insurance (GI) side, considerations of climate risk will be through the lens of tail risk arising from natural catastrophe, in defining appropriate levels of coverage. For Life insurers, they will need to consider the longer-term implications of climate change on the health and longevity of our societies. While the industry will inevitably need to collaborate with other professionals across the financial sector to manage these risks effectively, the long and short-term aspects of insurance business are well-suited to the context of climate change, given climatic impacts will be both extreme and crystallise over an extended time horizon.   Our journey on understanding the risks posed by climate change began with a climate adaptation report, published 2015,10 and focused solely on the risks faced by the insurance sector. A report on the banking side                                                       8 Boston Consulting Group 9 Swiss Re Economic Research & Consulting 
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice 6  6   followed three years later. Similarly, our first foray into regulatory-led climate stress testing was in last year’s Insurance Stress Test.   While the insurance industry has demonstrated clear progress so far, the manifold nature of physical and transition climate risk requires an evolving and highly collaborative response, with actors in both the financial system and the real economy acting in tandem to avert loss.   Insurers and regulators have a shared responsibility to continue to advance their thinking and take action. The most effective response will be one in which everyone plays their part.  Furthermore, the prize for those insurers that manage climate change well, and are able to understand and price the risks appropriately, is increased business opportunity for innovation that support their customers to adapt and mitigate the changing risks.  The Bank of England’s strategy  So, what is the Bank of England’s response, and what are we prepared to do to help the insurance sector to respond to the challenges?  Our approach has three broad angles:   1) Promoting the safety and soundness of the industry by setting expectations and promoting good practice about how firms manage climate-related financial risk internally;   2) Ensuring policyholder protection by conducting scenario analyses to help firms better prepare for the crystallisation of climate risks ‘on the horizon’ so that firms take into account those future risks as they make decisions today; and,   3) Global engagement with the financial services industry and other regulators to facilitate understanding and encourage mitigation of physical and transitional climate risks.  Setting Expectations: Supervisory strategy (Supervisory Statement 3/19, Climate Financial Risk Forum and the general insurance framework)  The actions taken by individual insurers will be instrumental in determining how well climate-related risks are managed.                                                                                                                                                                                   10 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/prudential-regulation/publication/impact-of-climate-change-on-the-uk-insurance-sector.pdf 
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice 7  7   In light of this, in April 2019, we became the first regulator to publish supervisory guidance (SS3/19) which sets out our expectations on how the insurers and banks that we regulate should approach the financial risks arising from climate change.11   The supervisory statement encourages insurers to focus on four aspects in developing an enhanced approach to managing climate risk:    Governance,   Risk management,  Scenario analysis, and   Disclosure.   Taken together, each of these four areas comprise a strategic approach which covers both the immediate short-term impacts of climate change, as well as horizon-level risks which could crystallise in future.   Since the release of the supervisory statement, we have been engaging with insurers over the past year to understand the industry’s progress.   We communicated our findings in a letter to the industry in July this year. 12 This highlighted that most firms are developing approaches to identify, assess, manage, report and disclose climate-related financial risks and some have started to embed them into their governance and control structures. Some examples of best practice from both GI and Life firms include:   Governance: The more advanced firms were able to describe a clear allocation of responsibility below the Senior Manger Function-holder, and clear roles and responsibilities across all three lines of defence.  Board Oversight: The more advanced firms have provided training for their board to enable them to oversee this risk appropriately.  Control Structures: the better arrangements observed demonstrate a clear distinction between elements of climate risk as a financial risk, reputational risk and corporate social responsibility issue. Some firms have amended committee terms of reference to include explicit reference to climate risk.  Risk Management: The most developed firms have largely completed this, whilst acknowledging that frameworks will need to be reviewed and updated periodically as the risks continue to evolve and materialise. Some firms considered the far-reaching breadth and magnitude of climate risk by distinguishing between financial risk management and corporate responsibility.                                                        11 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2019/enhancing-banks-and-insurers-approaches-to-managing-the-financial-risks-from-climate-change-ss 12 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/prudential-regulation/letter/2020/managing-the-financial-risks-from-climate-change.pdf?la=en&hash=A6B4DD1BE45B2762900F54B2F5BF2F99FA448424 
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice 8  8    Disclosure: Best practise was observed by firms that could publish separate and fully comprehensive climate disclosures.   In relation to managing risks associated with the asset portfolio – of particular relevance to life insurers, we observed the following best practice:   Strategy: The more advanced firms had a clear strategy and ownership of the asset portfolio and intentions to de-carbonise.   Risk Management and Metrics: We observed the use of a ‘portfolio warming metric’ to analyse how ‘green’ their investments are and help understand the warming potential embedded in the portfolio. The most advanced practice we have seen is a firm with its own internal metric to quantify the value at risk stemming directly from climate change within its investment portfolio. These types of metrics are forward looking and over time will assist firms in strategic decision making.  Whilst this first review revealed good levels of progress, the developing of enhanced approaches to managing climate-related risks remains a novel process for many. There is still some way to go for a number of insurers in terms of embedding a climate risk management strategy which is underpinned by regular scenario modelling and accompanied by detailed climate disclosures of both sides of the balance sheet.   To give some of the more developed approaches to assessing climate related risks: the more advanced firms are using scenarios to:   • Inform their business;  • Develop their understanding of climate risk (such as the potential transmission channels);  • Inform their internal model risk calibrations; and  • Inform the integration of climate risk into their risk management framework.   Furthermore, some firms have tailored scenarios to reflect their business, and accessed a range of resources to inform their scenario work. Firm-specific scenarios tended to test different business units and differentiate impacts on business lines within business units.   In addition, these scenarios often looked at both physical and transition risks as well as investigating a range of short- and long-term time horizons. We recognise that climate change remains a complicated and nuanced risk; and we intend to assist the industry in embedding our supervisory expectations as much as possible.  This then gets me on to our next initiative relating to the Climate Financial Risk Forum (CFRF).  
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice 9  9   In March 2019, we established the CFRF; a working group set “by industry, for industry” that is co-chaired by the Prudential Regulation Authority (PRA) and the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA).13 The group (which is comprised of banks, insurers and asset managers as well as regulators) has the primary objective of building capacity and sharing best practice, in order to advance our sector’s responses to the financial risks arising from climate change.   In June 2020 the CFRF released four industry-produced chapters covering scenario analysis, risk management, disclosure, and innovation. In addition to being rich and practical guides on understanding and managing the climate-related financial risks, both for assets and liabilities, we feel the content from these chapters will provide valuable assistance to both life and general insurers when adopting the expectations we set out in SS3/19.  Moreover, in May 2019, we facilitated the convening of an cross-industry working group to produce a practical framework to assist general insurers in assessing the financial impacts arising from physical climate change.14 The uncertainty of long-term climatic model predictions and the limitations of existing tools has created a number of challenges for general insurers in understanding the potential impacts of extreme weather on their liabilities. In response to these challenges, the group developed a framework intended to guide insurers through the process of evaluating how business processes could be impacted in a range of climate outcomes.   This technical framework for general insurers and the working guide produced by the CFRF are publicly available, indicating our commitment to not only regulated insurers and the embedding of our supervisory expectations, but also to the wider insurance industry.  Horizon-scanning (Insurance Stress Test 2019, Climate Biennial Exploratory Scenario)  In 2019, we became one of the first regulators globally to integrate climate scenarios into our insurance stress testing cycle. Climate stress testing encourages insurers to imagine these longer–term risks – and while the most severe impacts of climate change remain on the horizon, scenario analysis helps in understanding the potential industry impacts and the actions that are required now if we are to deliver an early orderly transition.   The 2019 Insurance Stress Test (IST) exercise asked the UK’s largest life and general insurers to shock both assets and liabilities according to prescribed climatic impacts.15 This exercise was exploratory in nature –                                                       13 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/climate-change/climate-financial-risk-forum 14 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2019/a-framework-for-assessing-financial-impacts-of-physical-climate-change 15 To date the Biennial Exploratory Scenario (BES) and the Insurance Stress Test (IST) have only covered the banking and insurance sectors respectively.  However, in recognition of the potential magnitude and interconnectedness of risks within the financial services sector from climate risks, the forthcoming Climate BES will be expanded to include both banks and insurers. 
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice 10  10   specifically not focused on setting capital requirements, but instead designed to encourage firms to develop analytical approaches to climate scenarios in preparation for future PRA exercises.   For many insurers this IST exercise was the first time they had conducted a climate exercise, and there were therefore a number of valuable learnings for both us and insurers. The exercise highlighted gaps in capabilities, data and tools to appropriately model climate-related scenarios, meaning firms’ quantitative returns were often disparate and difficult to compare across the wider industry. Similarly, for the PRA, the exercise highlighted key learnings to inform the design, specification, and reporting requirements for future climate exercises.   Our Biennial Exploratory Scenario (BES), will focus on a more comprehensive set of scenarios for both banks and insurers to model against the balance sheet. It will involve an extended modelling horizon with integrated macro-financial variables, with the expectation that firms will evaluate the vulnerabilities of their most significant individual counterparties as well as their own exposures under each of three illustrative scenarios.  However, to support this increased level of ambition we intend to focus only on the very largest insurers, as well as to maintain a greater level of engagement throughout the exercise – both before and after launch.  External engagement  Climate change, and the financial risks associated with it, will have implications for insurers around the world and it is important for regulators and industry to work together in response.   Where some firms are ahead in their thinking in climate risk, we expect knowledge sharing and collaboration to take place to facilitate a holistic response to an issue which concerns the entire industry.    The PRA - as a regulator and part of a central bank - has taken steps to share our knowledge and encourage the mitigation of climate risk amongst international regulators. The Bank set up the Sustainable Insurance Forum (SIF) in December 2016, in conjunction with the United Nations Environment Programme. The Bank was also one of eight founding members of the Network for Greening the Financial System in 2017, which has been developing climatic scenarios which are publicly available.16  In addition, we have raised the profile of climate change on the agenda of the International Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS), a leading multilateral group of over 200 supervisory authorities, which is working on guidance documents on monitoring climate-related financial risks. These will include actual examples and case studies that enable the practical implementation of supervisory material, helping this complex risk to be embedded within the global regulatory regime.                                                       16 https://www.ngfs.net/en  
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice 11  11    It is in that context that I would like to leave you with the following thought. Risk mitigation in a prudential regulation authority is largely conducted through the lens of firms’ capital adequacy. The firms themselves are required by us to manage their business within the parameters given by their capital generation and Solvency Capital Requirement. It is therefore possible that the incentives to address climate change risk for both firms and supervisors could be enhanced if it were incorporated explicitly into firms’ capital requirements. Whether and how this should be achieved is not an easy question to answer. But it is surely a necessary one, and one that we must begin to address in a timely manner, for insurers and for the wider regulated financial services industry.  Conclusion  We have set out the roadmap for our journey ahead; climate risk remains a real and credible threat to the integrity and soundness of the global insurance industry which, without significant action now, will only get more pronounced in the future.  In light of this, the sector must continue to develop and enhance its approach, building on the early foundations of progress which demonstrated a commitment to mitigating the very worst impacts of climate change.   We intend to provide as much opportunity for this development as possible, utilising our remit both in the UK and internationally to foster preparedness and underline the urgency of physical and transition risks.   The best response will encompass both of these aspects; private and public actors must equally play their part to help rewrite the climate narrative unfolding on the horizon.   Our challenge is significant, and our work is far from complete; however, it is not too late to change course, in fact, our future depends on it.  
   Japan's Economy and Monetary Policy Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Osaka (via webcast) Bank of Japan September 23, 2020    KURODA Haruhiko Governor of the Bank of Japan (English translation based on the Japanese original) 
 1  Introduction It is my great pleasure to have the opportunity today to exchange views with a distinguished gathering of business leaders in the Kansai region, which is taking place online this year due to the continued impact of the novel coronavirus (COVID-19). I would like to take this chance to express my sincerest gratitude for your cooperation with the various activities of the Bank of Japan's branches in Osaka, Kobe, and Kyoto.  At the outset, I would like to talk about the Bank's view on economic developments at home and abroad that are affected by COVID-19 and then explain the thinking behind the recent conduct of monetary policy.  I. Economic Developments at Home and Abroad Let me start by talking about economic developments at home and abroad. In response to the global spread of COVID-19 from the turn of this year, many countries and regions have conducted strict public health measures since early spring, such as restrictions on going outside and suspension of business and production activities. As a result, the global economy became depressed significantly in the first half of the year (Chart 1). The International Monetary Fund (IMF) projects that the global economic growth rate for 2020 will be minus 4.9 percent, which exceeds the negative figure registered at the time of the Global Financial Crisis. The spread of COVID-19 has not yet subsided globally, and the global economy has remained in a severe situation. That said, with many countries and regions resuming economic activities gradually while containing the spread, the global economy has started to pick up from a state of significant depression. The Global PMI has picked up from the bottom hit in April and recently has been above 50, which is the borderline between improvement and deterioration in business conditions perceived by firms. The IMF forecasts that the global economy will recover from the second half of 2020 and the growth rate will be positive in 2021. However, it assumes that the pace of recovery will be only moderate with preventive measures against COVID-19 continuing to be taken.  Japan's economy has shown similar developments to those of the global economy. Specifically, the economy seems to have started to pick up with economic activity resuming gradually, although it has remained in a severe situation (Chart 2). Due to the impact of 
 2  COVID-19, the real GDP growth rate for the April-June quarter registered significant negative growth, mainly reflecting declines in private consumption and exports, and downward pressure was put on the employment and income situation as well. A wide range of industries have been affected by COVID-19; in particular, those such as eating, drinking, and accommodations, as well as services for individuals have faced a significant decline in demand. That said, after the state of emergency was lifted, economic activity has been resuming gradually. As for private consumption, that of face-to-face services has remained at a low level, but goods consumption such as sales of household electrical appliances has picked up, mainly on the back of businesses reopening and income support measures. Exports, reflecting resumption in economic activities abroad, have turned to a pick-up, albeit at a low level. While there are extremely high uncertainties, the Bank projects as a baseline scenario that, as the impact of COVID-19 wanes, the economy will follow an improving trend. However, the pace of improvement is expected to be only moderate because precautionary efforts made voluntarily by firms and households will continue to act as a force constraining economic activity while vigilance against COVID-19 is maintained.  Let me move on to price developments in Japan (Chart 3). The year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) is likely to be negative for the time being, mainly affected by COVID-19, the past decline in crude oil prices, and discounts on accommodation fees through the "Go To Travel" campaign. That said, at least for now, firms' price cuts that aim at stimulating demand do not seem to be observed widely. The share of price-increasing items minus the share of price-decreasing items has continued to be a net "increase." Under these circumstances, the Bank projects as a baseline scenario that, along with economic improvement, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI will turn positive and then increase gradually.  However, the aforementioned outlook for economic activity and prices is extremely unclear, and risks are skewed to the downside. Above all, the consequences of COVID-19 and their impact on domestic and overseas economies entail extremely high uncertainties. In addition, attention should be paid to whether the COVID-19 shock will lead to a decline in firms' and households' growth expectations, thereby making their spending attitudes become cautious. Thus far, growth expectations do not seem to have declined significantly, as seen in firms' 
 3  stance of continuing to undertake much of the necessary investment for growth areas and in positive changes such as the use of information and communication technology (ICT). That said, it is necessary to closely monitor future developments.  II. The Bank's Conduct of Monetary Policy COVID-19 has had a large impact on not only domestic and overseas economies but also the financial side. With investors' risk sentiment deteriorating globally from late February, financial markets rapidly became unstable. Firms' financial positions weakened worldwide, reflecting a decline in sales that was due to a significant depression in the global economy.  Governments and central banks around the world have responded swiftly on a large scale to the economic and financial shock brought about by COVID-19. Among these efforts, the central banks' responses have two things in common. One is support for financing, mainly of firms, such as through funds-supplying measures to support lending as well as purchases of CP and corporate bonds, and the other is ensuring stability in financial markets through large-scale provision of liquidity, mainly by conducting asset purchases. In this regard, the Bank has enhanced monetary easing since March and implemented the following three measures (Chart 4).  First, the Bank introduced the Special Program to Support Financing in Response to the Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) in order to support financing, mainly of firms. The total size of this program will be more than 130 trillion yen. Specifically, this program consists of (1) purchases of CP and corporate bonds with the upper limit of about 20 trillion yen and (2) the Special Funds-Supplying Operations to Facilitate Financing in Response to the Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19), which will be about 110 trillion yen at maximum. Through this special operation, the Bank provides funds on favorable terms to financial institutions that make loans in response to COVID-19.  Second, to ensure stability in financial markets, the Bank has provided ample yen and foreign currency funds. As for the yen funds, under yield curve control, the Bank decided to purchase a necessary amount of Japanese government bonds (JGBs) without setting an upper limit with a view to stabilizing the yield curve at a low level. Regarding foreign 
 4  currency funds, the Bank has provided ample U.S. dollar funds through the strengthened U.S. dollar funds-supplying operations.  Third, with a view to lowering the risk premia in asset markets, the Bank has actively purchased exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs), thereby preventing firms' and households' sentiment from deteriorating, mainly through volatility in asset markets, and supporting positive economic activity.  These measures have had positive effects. Although financial markets are still nervous due to vigilance against COVID-19, tension has eased recently. Corporate financing has continued to be under stress, but the environment for external funding has remained accommodative (Chart 5). Funding costs have been at low levels, and both the year-on-year rates of increase in the amount outstanding of bank lending and in the aggregate amount outstanding of CP and corporate bonds have remained high. This is a big difference from the time of the Global Financial Crisis; that is, downward pressure from the financial side on the real economy intensified during the Global Financial Crisis, whereas in the current crisis, with stability of the financial system being maintained on the whole, the environment for external funding has remained accommodative, also supported by the policy effects. It is expected that stability of the financial system will not be hampered significantly and the economy will continue to be supported from the financial side. That said, the financial system could be affected when the challenge for economic entities shifts from a liquidity problem to a solvency one. Thus, future developments warrant close attention.  As with governments and central banks around the world, the Japanese government and the Bank have made swift responses to the current crisis on a large scale. Specifically, the government has conducted economic measures with a project size of 234 trillion yen, significantly exceeding the scale of measures taken during the Global Financial Crisis. In order to address an emergency situation such as the current one, cooperation between the government and central bank is effective in terms of policy conduct. Let me elaborate on this through two points.  
 5  The first is about support for financing, mainly of firms, at a time of crisis. In this regard, the globally shared understanding is that the central bank provides liquidity and the government provides solvency support. This time in Japan, in line with this understanding, the government has provided credit guarantees on loans made by private financial institutions to small and medium-sized firms while the Bank has provided funds on favorable terms to those institutions through the Special Funds-Supplying Operations to Facilitate Financing in Response to the Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19). This system has been working well.  The second point is about the relation between fiscal and monetary policies. Reflecting the unprecedented large-scale economic measures conducted by the Japanese government to address COVID-19, the issuance of JGBs has increased. Meanwhile, the Bank has maintained interest rates at low levels by actively purchasing JGBs. These active purchases are based on the need to conduct monetary policy, and recently, given the impact of COVID-19, the aim of such purchases is to maintain stability in the bond market. Through this, the Bank also intends to support the economy and fulfill its role of achieving price stability. In this manner, a policy mix of fiscal and monetary policies can be achieved effectively while the government and the Bank fulfill their respective roles.  Thus far, I have explained the Bank's monetary policy responses to the current crisis. The Bank will continue to provide support for financing, mainly of firms, and maintain stability in financial markets while taking into account developments in the regional economy.  Before ending my speech, I would like to touch on the challenges of monetary policy conduct from a somewhat long-term perspective. Compared with the period prior to the Global Financial Crisis, there is a higher probability that the policy interest rates in advanced economies will fall to the lower bound amid the situation of a declining trend in the natural rate of interest. Against this background, these economies have faced the common challenges of how to enhance the effectiveness and credibility of monetary policy. As a result of a review of the framework of monetary policy, the Federal Reserve announced last month that it would seek to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time. The Federal Reserve also made clear that it would aim to achieve inflation moderately 
 6  above 2 percent for some time following periods when inflation has been running persistently below 2 percent.  The Bank has taken various actions to overcome such challenges. In September 2016, in particular, it adopted the framework of "Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) with Yield Curve Control." One of the components is the "inflation-overshooting commitment" in which the Bank commits itself to expanding the monetary base until the year-on-year rate of increase in the observed CPI exceeds the price stability target of 2 percent and stays above the target in a stable manner. Under this framework, it aims to attain a situation where the inflation rate is 2 percent on average over the business cycle. Thus, the Bank views the Federal Reserve's thinking that underlies its latest decision as consistent with that of the Bank on the monetary policy conduct to date.  The Bank recognizes that it remains necessary to maintain highly accommodative financial conditions, aiming to achieve the price stability target as well as responding to COVID-19. In particular, since the economic and financial impact of COVID-19 is highly uncertain, the Bank, for the time being, will closely monitor this impact and not hesitate to take additional easing measures if necessary.  Thank you very much for your attention.  
September 23, 2020KURODAHaruhikoGovernor of the Bank of JapanJapan's Economy and Monetary PolicySpeech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Osaka(via webcast)IntroductionI.Economic Developments at Home and AbroadII.The Bank's Conduct of Monetary Policy
-6-5-4-3-2-101234560002040608101214161820CYAveragefrom 1980 through 2019: +3.5%2019: +2.9%2020:-4.9%2021:+5.4%IMF forecastsy/y % chg.2025303540455055600708091011121314151617181920ManufacturingServicess.a.,DICYGlobal EconomyGlobal Growth Rate (IMF, June 2020)Global PMIChart 1Note: In the right-hand chart, figures for manufacturing are the "J.P.Morgan Global Manufacturing PMI" and those for services are the "J.P.Morgan Global Services Business Activity Index."Sources: IMF; IHS Markit (© and database right IHS Markit Ltd 2020. All rights reserved.).I. Economic Developments180859095100105110115120Jan.Jan.Jan.Jan.Jan.Real exportss.a.,CY 2015=100161718192080859095100105110Jan.Jan.Jan.Jan.Jan.CAI (travel balance adjusted)CAIs.a., CY 2011=1001617181920Private Consumptionand ExportsConsumption Activity Index (CAI, Real)Real ExportsChart 2Note: Based on staff calculations. In the left-hand chart, figures for the CAI (travel balance adjusted) exclude inbound tourism consumption and include outbound tourism consumption.Sources:Bank of Japan; Ministry of Finance, etc.I. Economic Developments2
-3-2-1012307091113151719CPI (less fresh food)CPI (less fresh food and energy)y/y % chg.CY-60-40-20020406007091113151719% pointsCYConsumer Price Index (CPI)Diffusion Index of Price ChangesConsumer PricesNotes: 1. In the left-hand chart, figures exclude the effects of the consumption tax hike in April 2014.2. As for the right-hand chart, figures are defined as the share of increasing items in the CPI (all items less fresh food) minus the share of decreasing items. The share ofincreasing/decreasing items is the share of items for which price indices increased/decreased from a year earlier.Sources: Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications; Bank of Japan.Chart 3I. Economic Developments3Supporting Corporate FinancingSpecial Program to Support Financing in Response to COVID-19:total size of about 130 tril. yen + α Purchases of CP and corporate bonds: amount outstanding of about 20 tril. yen at maximum(previous amount outstanding of about 5 tril. yen)Special Funds-Supplying Operations to Facilitate Financing in Response to COVID-19: about 110 tril. yenStabilizing Financial MarketsActive Purchases of ETFs and J-REITsETFs: annual pace of about 6 tril. yen→ annual pace with the upper limit of about 12 tril. yen (for the time being)J-REITs: annual pace of about 90 bil. yen→ annual pace with the upper limit of about 180 bil. yen (for the time being)Ample and Flexible Provision of Yen and Foreign Currency FundsFurther active purchases of JGBs and T-Bills: unlimitedEnhancement of the U.S. Dollar Funds-Supplying Operations: unlimitedII. The Bank's Conduct of Monetary PolicyChart4The Bank's Measures in Response to COVID-194
0.00.20.40.60.81.01.21.41.61.82.0091011121314151617181920Bank lending rates (short-term)Bank lending rates (long-term)CP (3-month)Corporate bonds (rated AA)%CY-8-6-4-20246810121416091011121314151617181920Lending by domesticcommercial banksCP and corporate bondsCYy/y %chg.Funding CostsAmount Outstanding of Bank Lending, CP, and Corporate BondsFinancial ConditionsChart 5Notes: 1. In the left-hand chart, figures for issuance yields for CP up to September 2009 are the averages for CP (3-month, rated a-1 or higher). Those from October 2009 are the averages for CP (3-month, rated a-1). Figures for issuance yields for corporate bonds are the averages for domestically issued bonds launched on a particular date. Bonds issued by banks and securitiescompanies, etc., are excluded. Figures for bank lending rates and issuance yields for corporate bonds show 6-month backward moving averages.2. In the right-hand chart, figures for lending by domestic commercial banks are monthly averages. Figures for CP and corporate bonds are those at the end of period. Lending by domestic commercial banks includes loans to firms, individuals, and local governments.Sources: Bloomberg; Bank of Japan; Japan Securities Depository Center; Capital Eye; I-N Information Systems.II. The Bank's Conduct of Monetary Policy5
Jerome H Powell: Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic SecurityActSpeech by Mr Jerome H Powell, Chair of the Board of Governors of the Federal ReserveSystem, before the Committee on Financial Services, US House of Representatives,Washington DC, 22 September 2020.*   *   *Chairwoman Waters, Ranking Member McHenry, and other members of the Committee, thankyou for the opportunity to update you on our ongoing measures to address the hardship wroughtby the pandemic. The Federal Reserve, along with others across government, is working toalleviate the economic fallout. We remain committed to using our tools to do what we can, for aslong as it takes, to ensure that the recovery will be as strong as possible, and to limit lastingdamage to the economy.Economic activity has picked up from its depressed second-quarter level, when much of theeconomy was shut down to stem the spread of the virus. Many economic indicators showmarked improvement. Household spending looks to have recovered about three-fourths of itsearlier decline, likely owing in part to federal stimulus payments and expanded unemploymentbenefits. The housing sector has rebounded, and business fixed investment shows signs ofimprovement. In the labor market, roughly half of the 22 million payroll jobs that were lost inMarch and April have been regained as people return to work. Both employment and overalleconomic activity, however, remain well below their pre-pandemic levels, and the path aheadcontinues to be highly uncertain. The downturn has not fallen equally on all Americans; thoseleast able to bear the burden have been the most affected. The rise in joblessness has beenespecially severe for lower-wage workers, for women, and for African-Americans and Hispanics.This reversal of economic fortune has upended many lives and created great uncertainty aboutthe future.A full recovery is likely to come only when people are confident that it is safe to reengage in abroad range of activities. The path forward will depend on keeping the virus under control, and onpolicy actions taken at all levels of government.Since mid-March, we have taken forceful action, implementing a policy of near-zero rates,increasing asset holdings, and standing up 13 emergency lending facilities. We took thesemeasures to support broader financial conditions and more directly support the flow of credit tohouseholds, businesses of all sizes, and state and local governments. Our actions, takentogether, have helped unlock more than $1 trillion of funding, which, in turn, has helped keeporganizations from shuttering, putting them in a better position to keep workers on and to hirethem back as the economy continues to recover.The Main Street Lending Program (Main Street) has been of significant interest to this Committeeand to the public. Many of the businesses affected by the pandemic are smaller firms that rely onbanks for loans, rather than public credit markets. Main Street is designed to facilitate the flow ofcredit to small and medium-sized businesses. In establishing the facility, we conductedextensive outreach, soliciting public comment and holding in-depth discussions with lenders andborrowers of all sizes. In response to feedback, we have continued to make adjustments to MainStreet to provide greater support to small and medium-sized businesses and to nonprofitorganizations such as educational institutions, hospitals, and social service organizations.Nearly 600 banks, representing well more than half of the assets in the banking system, haveeither completed registration or are in the process of doing so. About 230 loans totaling roughly$2 billion are either funded or in the pipeline. Main Street is intended for businesses that were ona sound footing pre-pandemic and that have good longer-term prospects but which have 1 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
encountered temporary cash flow problems due to the pandemic and are not able to get credit onreasonable terms as a result. Main Street loans may not be the right solution for somebusinesses, in part because the CARES Act states clearly that these loans cannot be forgiven.Our credit facilities have improved lending conditions broadly, including for potential Main Streetborrowers. The evidence suggests that most creditworthy small and medium-sized businessescan currently get loans from private-sector financial institutions.Many of our programs rely on emergency lending powers that require the support of the TreasuryDepartment and are available only in unusual circumstances. By serving as a backstop to keycredit markets, our programs have significantly increased the extension of credit from privatelenders. However, the facilities are only that—a backstop. They are designed to support thefunctioning of private markets, not to replace them. Moreover, these are lending, not spendingpowers. Many borrowers will benefit from these programs, as will the overall economy, but forothers, a loan that could be difficult to repay might not be the answer. In these cases, direct fiscalsupport may be needed.Our economy will recover fully from this difficult period. We remain committed to using our fullrange of tools to support the economy for as long as is needed.Thank you. I look forward to your questions.Summary of Section 13(3) Facilities Using CARES Act FundingThe Municipal Liquidity FacilityThe Municipal Liquidity Facility (MLF) helps state and local governments better manage theextraordinary cash flow pressures associated with the pandemic, in which expenses, often forcritical services, are temporarily higher than normal and tax revenues are delayed or temporarilylower than normal. This facility addresses these liquidity needs by purchasing the short-termnotes typically used by these governments, along with other eligible public entities, to managetheir cash flows. By addressing the cash management needs of eligible issuers, the MLF wasalso intended to encourage private investors to reengage in the municipal securities market,including across longer maturities, thus supporting overall municipal market functioning.Under the MLF, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York lends to a special purpose vehicle (SPV)that will directly purchase up to $500 billion of short-term notes issued by a range of eligible stateand local government entities. Generally speaking, eligible issuers include all U.S. states,counties with a population of at least 500,000 residents, cities with a population of at least250,000 residents, certain multistate entities, and revenue-bond issuers designated as eligibleissuers by their state governors. Notes purchased by the facility carry yields designed to promoteprivate market participation that is, they carry fixed spreads based on the long-term rating of theissuer that are generally larger than those seen in normal times. With funding from the CARESAct (Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act), the Department of the Treasury hascommitted to make a $35 billion equity investment in the SPV.As of September 18, the facility had purchased two issues for a total outstanding amount of $1.7billion.The MLF has contributed to a strong recovery in municipal securities markets, which hasfacilitated a historic issuance of more than $250 billion of bonds since late March. State and localgovernments and other municipal bond issuers of a wide spectrum of types, sizes, and ratingshave been able to issue bonds, including long maturity bonds, with interest rates that are at ornear historical lows. Those municipal issuers who do not have direct access to the FederalReserve under the MLF have still benefited substantially from a better-functioning municipalsecurities market. 2 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
The Main Street Lending ProgramThe Federal Reserve established the Main Street Lending Program (Main Street) to supportlending to small and medium-sized businesses and nonprofit organizations that were in soundfinancial condition before the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic and that have good longer-termprospects but which have encountered temporary cash flow problems due to the pandemic, andare not able to get credit on reasonable terms as a result. In addition to providing loans forborrowers in current need of funds, Main Street offers a credit backstop for firms that do notcurrently need funding but may if the pandemic continues to erode their financial condition.Under Main Street, the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston has set up one SPV to manage andoperate five facilities: the Main Street New Loan Facility (MSNLF), the Main Street Priority LoanFacility (MSPLF), the Main Street Expanded Loan Facility (MSELF), the Nonprofit OrganizationNew Loan Facility (NONLF), and the Nonprofit Organization Expanded Loan Facility (NOELF).The SPV will purchase up to $600 billion in Main Street loan participations, while lenders retain apercentage of the loans. Main Street loans have a five-year maturity, no principal payments in thefirst two years, and no interest payments in the first year. Businesses with less than 15,000employees or 2019 revenues of less than $5 billion are eligible to apply for Main Street loans.Available loan sizes span from $250,000 to $300 million across the facilities and depend on thesize and financial health of the borrower. With funding from the CARES Act, the Department ofthe Treasury has committed to make a $75 billion equity investment in the SPV.The business facilities (MSNLF, MSPLF, and MSELF) and nonprofit facilities (NONLF andNOELF) have broadly similar terms, but differ in their respective underwriting standards. Thebusiness facilities use the same eligibility criteria for lenders and borrowers and have many ofthe same terms, while other features of the loans extended in connection with each facility differ.The loan types also differ in how they interact with the borrower’s outstanding debt, including withrespect to the level of pre-crisis indebtedness a borrower may have incurred. Similarly, thenonprofit facilities have many of the same characteristics, but some features of the loansextended in connection with each facility differ. Eligible lenders may originate new loans underMSNLF, MSPLF, and NONLF or may increase the size of existing loans under MSELF andNOELF.Main Street became operational on July 6. The Federal Reserve and Treasury have modified theprogram several times to reflect extensive consultations with stakeholders. As of September 18,nearly 600 lenders representing more than half of U.S. banking assets have registered toparticipate in the program, and the program has purchased over $1 billion in participations.Since Main Street became operational, the number of registered lenders and the amount of loanparticipations continue to increase. Program usage, will depend on the course of the economy,the demand for credit by small and medium-sized businesses, and the ability of lenders to meetcredit needs outside the Main Street program. Demand for Main Street loans may increase overtime if the pandemic continues to affect the ability of businesses and nonprofits to access creditthrough normal channels and as other support programs expire.The Secondary Market Corporate Credit FacilityThe Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facility (SMCCF) is designed to work alongside thePrimary Market Corporate Credit Facility (PMCCF) to support the ﬂow of credit to largeinvestment-grade U.S. companies so that they can maintain business operations and capacityduring the period of dislocation related to COVID-19. The SMCCF supports market liquidity bypurchasing in the secondary market corporate bonds issued by investment-grade U.S.companies, U.S. companies that were investment grade before the onset of the pandemic andremain near-investment-grade, and U.S.-listed exchange-traded funds (ETFs) whose investmentobjective is to provide broad exposure to the market for U.S. corporate bonds. 3 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
Under the SMCCF, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York lends to an SPV that purchases in thesecondary market both corporate bond portfolios in the form of ETFs and individual corporatebonds to track a broad market index. The SMCCF purchases ETF shares and corporate bondsat fair market value in the secondary market and avoids purchasing shares of ETFs when theytrade at prices that materially exceed the estimated net asset value of the underlying portfolio.The pace of purchases is a function of the condition of the U.S. corporate bond markets. Withfunding from the CARES Act, the Department of the Treasury has committed to make a $75billion equity investment in the SPV for the PMCCF and SMCCF, with a $25 billion allocationtoward the SMCCF.The SMCCF staggered its launch of ETF and bond purchases in order to act as quickly andeffectively as possible. Through ETF purchases beginning on May 12, the SMCCF providedliquidity to the corporate bond market relatively quickly. The Federal Reserve began directcorporate bond purchases under the broad market index purchase program on June 16. In itsfirst week of bond purchases, the SMCCF was purchasing about $370 million per day. As ofSeptember 18, purchases have been slowed to a current daily pace of approximately $20 millionof bonds and no ETFs, and the total SMCCF outstanding value has reached $12.8 billion.The SMCCF’s announcement effect was strong, quickly improving market functioning andunlocking the supply of hundreds of billions of dollars of private credit. Since late March, morethan $800 billion in corporate bonds have been issued without direct government or taxpayerinvolvement. The SMCCF has materially reduced its pace of purchases over the past fewmonths as a result of the substantial improvements in the functioning of the U.S. corporate bondmarkets. The pace of purchases going forward will continue to be guided by measures of marketfunctioning, increasing when conditions deteriorate and decreasing when conditions improve.The Primary Market Corporate Credit FacilityThe Primary Market Corporate Credit Facility (PMCCF) is designed to work alongside theSecondary Market Corporate Credit Facility (SMCCF) to support the ﬂow of credit to largeinvestment-grade U.S. companies so that they can maintain business operations and capacityduring the period of dislocation related to COVID-19. The PMCFF supports market liquidity byserving as a funding backstop for corporate debt.Under the PMCCF, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York lends to an SPV. The SPV willpurchase qualifying bonds and syndicated loans with maturities up to four years either as thesole investor in a bond issuance or as a participant in a loan or bond syndication at issuance,where the facility may purchase a maximum of 25 percent of the syndication. With funding fromthe CARES Act, the Department of the Treasury has committed to make a $75 billion equityinvestment in the SPV for the PMCCF and SMCCF, with a $50 billion allocation toward thePMCCF.As of September 18, there have not been any PMCCF transactions, nor have any indications ofinterest been received.The dual announcement of the SMCCF and PMCCF was well received by the market. BetweenMarch 23 and April 6, credit spreads for investment-grade bonds declined substantially. While thePMCCF has not purchased any bonds since it opened, it serves as a backstop should marketsenter another period of stress.The Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan FacilityThe Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) supports the flow of credit toconsumers and businesses by enabling the issuance of asset-backed securities (ABS)guaranteed by newly and recently originated consumer and business loans. 4 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
Under the TALF, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York lends to an SPV. The SPV will make upto $100 billion of three-year term loans available to holders of certain triple A-rated ABS backedby student loans, auto loans, credit card loans, loans guaranteed by the Small BusinessAdministration (SBA), and certain other assets. The Federal Reserve lends an amount equal tothe market value of the ABS less a haircut and the loan is secured at all times by the ABS. Withfunding from the CARES Act, Treasury has committed to make a $10 billion equity investment inthe SPV.As of September 18, the TALF has extended $2.9 billion in loans since its launch on May 20.Loans have been collateralized by SBA-guaranteed ABS, commercial mortgage-backedsecurities (CMBS), and premium-finance and student-loan ABS.The announcement and presence of the TALF has helped improve substantially liquidity in theABS markets, including those for CMBS and collateralized loan obligations, with spreads in someABS sectors returning close to normal levels. The TALF interest rates are attractive to borrowerswhen market conditions are stressed, but not in normal conditions. While the facility is authorizedto extend up to $100 billion in loans, total take-up will likely be much less unless ABS marketconditions worsen. 5 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
Fout! Onbekende naam voor documenteigenschap.  1           “Emerging from the crisis stronger together” How we can make Europe more resilient, prosperous and sustainable  HJ Schoo lecture given by Klaas Knot Amsterdam, 1 September 2020          
Fout! Onbekende naam voor documenteigenschap.  2    Ladies and gentlemen  It is an honour to give this year's HJ Schoo lecture. I have to say, it was a bold choice from the organisers to let me loose on you for an hour. There's a YouTube video doing the rounds of me being interviewed on the current affairs programme Buitenhof. While I'm talking, text appears below explaining what it is I am actually saying. A bit like subtitles. Unfortunately, that is not a luxury I can offer you this evening. But I will try to keep the economic jargon to a minimum. Even though you seem like an audience who can keep up.  I never knew Hendrik Jan Schoo personally, so in preparing for this lecture, I went a bit deeper into the man and his work. And as I was reading about him, I started wondering how he would have felt about me—a President of De Nederlandsche Bank— being chosen to give the lecture called by his name. Schoo was primarily a political thinker, with an acute sensitivity to the deeper currents running through society. Economics did not feature prominently in his work. But there was something else that struck me about Hendrik Jan Schoo. And here I will quote from Marc Chavannes’s description of him: “Schoo was a self-made man, from an everyday background. Reluctantly absorbed into the elite, he remained overtly concerned about the risks ordinary people face.” That last sentence resonated with me, because I realised that also fits my job description. “Managing the risks ordinary people face.”  Or, to be more precise: managing the financial risks ordinary people face, over which they have no control themselves.  Because make no mistake. What central banks do directly affects your life and that of everyone else around you. They ensure prices remain stable. That banks, insurers, pension funds and other financial institutions are sound and ethical. And that you can make payments efficiently and securely. So the economy can flourish and ordinary people can make a living, safe in the knowledge that their money will retain its value and is protected.   My own economic coming of age happened during the deep recession at the beginning of the eighties. I was a youngster of about 15, and evening after evening I would watch news reports about the bankruptcies. Unemployment and inflation had skyrocketed, and the hole in public finances kept getting deeper. I also saw the consequences for society, sometimes up close. Falling prices on the housing market meant the mortgage on my childhood home was ‘underwater’. I still remember very well the stress that caused my parents. How can an economic system get so out of control? The question fascinated me. It was the beginning of my lifelong interest in economics.  And now once again, we find ourselves in an economic maelstrom, but this time under unprecedented circumstances. One glance around this room is enough to see that. The pandemic has pushed the global economy into deep recession. The Dutch economy has also suffered a heavy blow.   Fortunately, the Dutch economy has a strong foundation. As Dutch Finance Minister Wopke Hoekstra so aptly put it, the government entered the crisis with deep pockets. This allowed it to absorb much of the blow for households and businesses. And thanks to their robust capital buffers, banks have the room to continue lending. This shows why it is so important to build up buffers in good times. Yes, De Nederlandsche Bank is singing the same old tune again. I am sure you recognise it. But, as one of my predecessors once said: the old tunes are often the best.  Our economy's strong foundation means we will also ultimately recover from this crisis. But I am honestly more concerned about Europe.  The European economy is expected to contract sharply this year. The ability to recover from such a blow is certainly not equal in all European countries. I am particularly concerned about the southern member states. Not only because most of them have been hit by the coronavirus. But also because these countries’ economies had already been struggling for over a decade. What we have seen in recent months is that the debate quickly turns to the future of the euro. That is bad news for Europe.  All this raises some important questions. Questions I would like to address together with you this evening. Why is it that economic shock waves, such as the banking crisis of 2008 and now the coronavirus crisis, are constantly throwing European cooperation out of balance? And how can we make Europe more resistant to these types of shocks, not just in view of this crisis, but with an eye to the future?  
Fout! Onbekende naam voor documenteigenschap.  3   Ladies and gentlemen, I will highlight why there is a tendency in Europe towards economic divergence between north and south. I will show you how we still benefit greatly from European cooperation. But also that we have to do something to correct the imbalances if we are to preserve the advantages. I will argue that we can do something, by finding common responses to common challenges, and through enhanced coordination of economic policy between the north and south. That is by no means straightforward, but it is indispensable for a smoothly functioning monetary union and a strong Europe, in the interests of sustainable prosperity for ordinary Dutch people. In other words, emerging from the crisis stronger together.  The challenges facing us I’d like to start by saying something about the economic advantages Europe has given us, and continues to give us. [Figure 1]  Figure 1: Emigration. Waving off departing family members as their boat leaves port.    I think you will recognise this sort of archive photo. An ocean liner. People on the quayside, waving off family and friends, sometimes flapping a handkerchief. The archetypal image of post-war emigration. In the period from 1945-1967 around half a million Dutch people left these shores for countries such as Canada, America, Australia and New Zealand, in search of a better life. They were not the only ones. In the years following the Second World War several million Europeans left the continent. And with good reason. In 1947 the outlook for Europe was sombre. The continent was financially devastated, everything was in short supply, and reconstruction efforts were slow to develop.  The outbreak of the Cold War paralysed European politics. Europe was perhaps very close to becoming a failed continent.  But fortunately, history took a different course. Europe focused on emerging from the ruins of two world wars and decades of bitter division to become one of the most free and prosperous places on Earth. We have by now become so used to this, that we sometimes forget what an astonishing feat it was. And that astonishing European feat, ladies and gentlemen, is in no small part thanks to European cooperation.   Take the European single market, the whole body of rules that facilitates the free movement of people, goods, services and capital. There has been considerable research into the benefits of the single market. Two conclusions invariably emerge from these studies: the first is that each member state benefits from the internal market, and the second is that small, open economies, such as the Netherlands, benefit the most. That is what you can see here in the graph. [Figure 2]   
Fout! Onbekende naam voor documenteigenschap.  4  Figure 2: Estimated benefits of the single market, in EUR per household    Taken together, the studies show that membership of the single market benefits households in the Netherlands by between 6,000 and 10,000 euros every year. Even when we take into account the Dutch contribution to the EU budget, there are still substantial welfare gains for the Netherlands. In other words, in the Netherlands we have the European single market to thank for a big piece of our pie.  But you may now ask: how about the euro, our common currency? How does that balance out? As you know, the creation of the euro was primarily a political project. Discussions on economic and monetary union gained momentum after the fall of the Berlin wall. Germany once again became a unified nation. The other European partners, principally the French, were keen to ensure the reunified Germany stayed embedded in a united Europe. That was the deal that Mitterrand made with Kohl: unification for you; the euro for us.  As well as political reasons, there were also strong economic arguments in favour of a common currency. A single market like the European market, where there is intensive trade between countries, benefits from fixed exchange rates. This reduces uncertainty surrounding foreign investments, and makes it easier to compare prices between states. And in turn, that promotes competition and trade.  The success of the single market is therefore built on the bedrock of the euro.   But a single currency also unfortunately brings disadvantages. Certainly for a group of countries that differ quite a bit from each other economically. For example, one common currency means one common rate of interest, and that rate is not always suited to each country. This can contribute to the build-up of debt, or to rocketing house prices. Irreversibly fixed exchange rates do not just offer stability, they also imply that countries can no longer use their exchange rate as a way to restore their competitiveness. Partly because of this, not all euro area countries have benefited equally from the euro. To put it bluntly: countries with stronger economies, such as the Netherlands, have benefited more than countries with weaker economies.  So why does a common currency work in favour of stronger economies? Allow me to explain.  To do so, I will use the Netherlands and Italy as examples. Exchange rates between euro countries were frozen, as it were, when the euro was introduced in 1999. Since then, productivity growth in has been higher in the Netherlands than in Italy. This is what economists refer to when they talk about 'stronger' and 'weaker' economies. Productivity growth means you can make more or better products with the same means of production and thus offer better value in terms of price to quality. In order to keep Italian products competitive with Dutch products, the Italian currency would have had to depreciate against our 
Fout! Onbekende naam voor documenteigenschap.  5  currency. As a result, Italian products would become cheaper. Before the guilder and the lira became irreversibly linked, we regularly saw this kind of depreciation of the lira. But that is of course no longer possible now. You can see that very well in this graph, which shows the exchange rate of the guilder against the Italian lira.[Figure 3]  Figure 3: Historical exchange rate of Dutch guilder against Italian lira.    At the beginning of the 70s you needed nearly 6 guilders to buy 1,000 lire, but in 1999 you could get 1,000 lire with just over 1 guilder. As long as Italian productivity growth lags behind Dutch growth, the only alternative is for Italian wages to also lag behind Dutch wages. But our wage growth is already only very modest. That would imply that there is virtually no more room left for wage growth in Italy. And with our in-built tendency to resort to wage moderation at every recession, Italian wages even need to be reduced from time to time. Wage cuts in other words. Economists are good at coming up with these sorts of pure, conceptual solutions. But do you remember the weeks of protests in the early 1980s, when the first Lubbers cabinet cut public sector pay? When trash was piled high in the street? Cutting monthly income simply causes practical problems, and that applies just as much to Italians as it does to the Dutch.   Thanks to the euro, the Netherlands has enjoyed a stronger competitive position than if we still had our own currency. Compared to southern Europe, but also compared to the rest of the world, thanks to the weaker euro exchange rate. And that boosts our exports. It is how we in the Netherlands obtain such an enormous trade surplus: we export much more than we import. This generates higher operating profits for business and also increases tax revenues for the Dutch State. You could say that the euro always gives a little boost not only to the Dutch economy, but also to the Dutch treasury. For a country like Italy, where productivity growth is lower, roughly the opposite applies. At the risk of oversimplification: the absence of an exchange rate between euro area countries is a benefit to the stronger economies, while it is a relative burden to the weaker economies.   That is why the stronger and the weaker economies have a tendency to diverge. If this imbalance persists for too long, it will lead to problems like we saw during the 2011 European debt crisis, when several southern euro area countries experienced major financial problems.  Well, you might say: “Tough luck, but that's just how it is.” Did we not agree in the Maastricht Treaty that countries in the euro area have to look after their own finances?  The famous no bail-out clause. If only it were so simple. Of course, each country is still responsible for its own economy and public finances. But in 2011 we learned the painful lesson that we cannot just 
Fout! Onbekende naam voor documenteigenschap.  6  abandon struggling euro area countries to their own fate. This would unleash financial forces that could bring about the disintegration of the euro. The economic and political havoc that would then arise is literally incalculable. You just would not know how it would unravel. So that is something we would definitely not want to happen. As long as the phenomenon of divergent growth exists, stronger economies will occasionally have to step in to help weaker ones.   But it would be much better to tackle the root cause of this growth divergence. These differences between north and south are not after all a God-given natural phenomenon. You might be wondering: why don't these southern member states carry out reforms to make their economies as productive as in Germany and the Netherlands? Yes, well, ultimately that is what has to happen. And it is also an uncomfortable fact that in recent years many opportunities have been missed. Not only in terms of reforming the economy, but also in terms of putting public finances in order and cleaning up bank balance sheets. Building up buffers in good times, fixing the roof while the sun is shining. Yes, still the same old tune. Yet people in the north who keep grumbling about this do have a point.   But you know, the Italians have a nice expression for that: se mia nonna avesse le ruote, sarebbe una carriola. If my grandmother had wheels she'd be a wheelbarrow. But now we all have a new crisis to contend with, the coronavirus crisis. And what is particularly cruel about this crisis—and I might add hazardous for Europe—is that it is precisely the countries in the euro area with the most vulnerable economies that have now also been hit hardest by the virus. That of course has nothing to do with the euro. But it does mean those countries are being hit hard yet again. Like the Netherlands, they, too, will have to intervene decisively to mitigate the effects of the coronavirus on citizens and businesses. Consequently, their government debt will rise further. And they were not in a financially strong position to begin with. As a result, there is a risk that governments in these countries already have to start introducing austerity measures before the economy has been able to recover. That would in the first instance further exacerbate the economic downturn. Take a country like Greece. At the end of 2019, Greece's public debt was already 175% of its GDP. Greece is the red bar all the way to the left of this chart. [Figure 4]  Figure 4: Wide divergence of public debt in euro area countries    Greece is not able to support its economy in the same way as the Netherlands. Just for comparison: 175% amounts to more than three times the Dutch public debt.  So if we do nothing, we will see further divergence between euro area countries. And the risk of recurring euro area crises. But there is something else that also worries me in this respect. And that is waning 
Fout! Onbekende naam voor documenteigenschap.  7  public support for the euro as a result of this growth divergence. Public support for the euro among euro area citizens remains high. That is good news. But can we take it for granted that it will stay that way?   Southern Europe reaps relatively little benefit from the euro. And in northern Europe, people often feel they are being called on to bail out their Mediterranean partners time and again. Structural transfers of wealth generally spoil the atmosphere. Not only for the providers—but uncomfortable feelings of inferiority can quickly arise among receivers. You can even observe this in countries where wealth is transferred between regions. Take Belgium and Italy for example. If we also doubt the work ethic of the Italians, a country where the average worker works almost 300 hours more per year than in the Netherlands, you can imagine that this does not benefit relations. [Figure 5]  Figure 5: Cover Elsevier Magazine   I would like to stay on this subject of public support, because there is another potentially dangerous trend I detect in northern Europe. And that is the lagging public support for free trade in general. There is for instance a growing group of Europeans who believe that globalisation has been good for their country as a whole, but not for them personally. We can see similar developments in our own country. For example, more than one in five Dutch people think globalisation offers more disadvantages than advantages. People on lower incomes in particular feel they are on the receiving end of the disadvantages. Unfortunately, there is some truth in that. Dutch businesses have benefited greatly from free trade, the single market and the euro. For Dutch households, this applies to a lesser extent.   In recent decades, household disposable income growth has not kept pace with growth in the economy as a whole. Just take a look at this graph. [Figure 6]              
Fout! Onbekende naam voor documenteigenschap.  8  Figure 6: Household income grows at a slower rate than the economy    The red line represents the growth of the Dutch economy as a whole since 1995. The blue line shows the available income of households. Why are these two lines growing apart from each other? Well, to a large extent it is because the share of our national income that workers receive (the labour share of income) has been steadily declining, while the share going to providers of capital has increased.  Incidentally, this is not a typically Dutch phenomenon. We can also observe this trend in other Western economies.  The fact that workers in the Netherlands are getting a smaller and smaller piece of the economic pie is also due to globalisation and technological progress. But there is something else going on in the Netherlands. And that is the flexibilisation of the labour market, which has gone too far. That is something that all sides can agree on. The often vulnerable position of flex workers is already a cause for concern from a social perspective. But on top of that—and now I return to my argument about Europe—it has also contributed to the fact that working people are getting an increasingly smaller piece of the economic pie. And if a large proportion of them start to see “Europe” first and foremost as a private party for businessmen, with scant benefits for their own pockets, then that will undermine support for the European project.  Good. To sum up what I have said so far. The euro is a pillar of the single market, and brings us considerable prosperity. However, the euro also tends to lead to diverging economic growth within Europe. The current coronavirus crisis exacerbates this phenomenon. If we do nothing, then we run the risk of ending up in a new euro area crisis, and public support for European integration could come under pressure. In the weaker economies of southern Europe, because they do not reap enough of the benefits. And in the stronger economies such as the Netherlands, due to uneven distribution of benefits, and with it the willingness to help out southern European states.  I think that is what we in the Netherlands should be worried about. Not only based on our own clear economic self-interests, but also because Europe is about so much more than the financial benefits. We see that the balances of power on the world stage are shifting. One superpower retreats into confusion, while new superpowers emerge. Unfortunately, these are not always countries which share the values we do. For many refugees, Europe is that beacon of freedom, peace and prosperity for which they are prepared to risk their lives. A sign of our strength, and at the same time a challenge for European society.  And then there is still the climate crisis. If we want to realise our ambition to limit global warming to less than 2 degrees Celsius, then we will have to complete the transition to a climate-neutral economy 
Fout! Onbekende naam voor documenteigenschap.  9  by around 2050. Substantial investments are required to achieve that. Investments that will get off the ground much more easily if we increase the price of emitting carbon and other greenhouse gases. In short, how are we going to make sure we emerge from this economic crisis in a more sustainable way?  The shifting balances of power, the refugee crisis, the climate crisis. You don't have to be a Europhile to know that we can tackle these transnational challenges better at European level than at national level. These challenges call for European cooperation within a strong European Union. And this is inextricably linked to strengthening the foundations of our currency union. This is perfectly possible. The imperfections in the Economic and Monetary Union I outlined earlier are not like the coronavirus, which hit us out of nowhere. We created them ourselves. And that means we can also fix them ourselves, if we want to.   But there are three things we need to do for that to happen. The first is to fight this coronavirus crisis collectively and effectively. European heads of state did an excellent job this summer by creating the Next Generation Recovery Fund. The second is that the countries in the currency union should better coordinate their fiscal policies, with the level of public debt playing a more central role. And the third is that we also need to better coordinate other areas of our economic policy. Now let me take you through how I envisage this.  Emerging stronger from the crisis: an agenda This summer, European leaders wasted no time in setting up a European recovery fund. Their decision was an important step in the fight against the coronavirus crisis. During the public debate, comparisons were made with the Marshall Plan, the US aid programme to help rebuild post-war Europe. I think it is a very apt comparison. The elements that made the Marshall plan a success are reflected in the plan for a European recovery. The recovery fund is not emergency aid but is intended to support public investments in countries that strengthen economic growth potential. The receiving countries retain an important degree of responsibility for how the money is spent, within certain set conditions. The financing has been structured in such a way as to ensure southern European countries do not accumulate ever more debt. And the fund is big enough to really make a difference.  It is also good that priority is given to investments in digitisation and making the economy climate-neutral. That way we can kill two birds with one stone: we narrow the gap between those leading the way and those lagging behind, and we invest in the sustainable growth capacity of the euro area.   The strength of this proposal lies not only in its collective, but also in its temporary nature. Structural transfers from one country to another can quickly lead to bad feeling, as we have seen elsewhere.  That is not the case with the recovery fund. The fund is temporary, there are no direct transfers between countries, nor do countries assume responsibility for each other's debts.    The recovery fund is therefore an excellent initiative. But that it is not enough, which brings me to the second item on my list. If we want to put an end to divergent growth in Europe we will also have to coordinate fiscal policy more closely. In recent years, European fiscal rules have been particularly focused on the maximum budget deficit, the well-known 3% of gross domestic product. But as a result, in practice the rules proved to be strict during bad times, and ineffective during the good times. Thus accentuating the peaks and troughs of our economy, instead of smoothing them. Moreover, there was scant attention for the differences between countries. For example, after the financial crisis of 2008, any country with an excessive deficit had to consolidate its public finances roughly all at the same pace, regardless of the level of public debt at the outset.   There is one lesson I think we can take from this: we need to pay more attention to public debt levels. The Maastricht Treaty sets a public debt limit of 60% of GDP, although there is some flexibility.  You can exceed this threshold, as long as you bring public debt back down to the 60% reference value. This limit must regain its prominence. It is a recognisable benchmark, and allows countries the room to temporarily increase their debt during economic downturns. However, the pace at which countries are required to return to below this limit needs to vary more than it does now, taking their individual economic situation into account. In economically more favourable times, countries with higher government debt levels should have to make greater efforts to reduce their debt than countries with lower debt levels.This does more justice to differences in starting positions, and the European economy will also benefit if all countries do not tighten their fiscal reins at the same time.   
Fout! Onbekende naam voor documenteigenschap.  10  In addition to restoring the 60% limit, I believe that in reducing public debt, we should put more emphasis on reforms that promote economic growth. Rather than the austerity measures that often constrain growth in the first instance. Without robust growth, it is simply very difficult for countries with high levels of public debt to bring their debt back to a healthy level in relation to the size of the economy. We have seen that.  If austerity is unavoidable, fiscal rules should at least protect public investment. This investment, for example in infrastructure, sustainable energy, education and science, has all too often fallen victim to austerity measures. Heavily indebted countries have seen the erosion of their economic growth potential due to chronic under-investment. As a result, they are left lagging even further behind.  If we take another look at the Netherlands, what does this mean for Dutch fiscal policy in the forthcoming term of government? Dutch public debt is expected to increase from around 50% to 60% of GDP in the coming years. This is a sharp increase, but thanks to our comfortable starting position, we will end up at a level that is still manageable. That is why I see no reason to cut spending or raise taxes at this time. After all, our economic recovery could still be fragile in 2021.   What we do need to do now is strengthen the growth potential of the Dutch economy with structural reforms and temporary, targeted investments. This is not of course a plea for unbridled growth in government spending. After all, there will always be new, unexpected setbacks. So I think it is wise to be wary of new policy initiatives that place a structural burden on government finances.   This addresses fiscal policy in Europe and in the Netherlands. The third point on my European to-do list for tackling growth imbalances is to improve coordination in other areas of economic policy. I have already talked about the divergent competitiveness of the euro area member states. And how this contributes to large trade surpluses in some countries, and large trade deficits in others. To effectively tackle this problem, all member states must play their part. Weaker economies need to implement reforms that increase their productivity and competitiveness. This is good for exports, for economic growth, for employment, and for public debt. The point I want to make here is that these reforms are more likely to succeed if the stronger economies also do their fair share. For these countries, that means implementing reforms that give households more room to spend, so that they can boost imports and reduce their trade surpluses. This will not only help the weaker economies, but also benefit the stronger ones. Behind large and persistent trade surpluses, there are often underlying problems, such as savings retained by companies for tax reasons, or stagnant wage growth.  If I apply that to the Netherlands for a moment, it means we also have work to do. It means we have to critically review our tax system, so that labour can be taxed less heavily and workers get to retain more of their pay. And we need to tackle the imbalances in the labour market between permanent and flex workers, by reducing tax differences between contractual employees and the self-employed. As far as I am concerned, these are the key challenges for the coming term of the government.  Summing up, I have talked to you about the recovery fund, and the coordination of fiscal and other economic policies. So, have we covered everything, then? No, not entirely. There is still something else to discuss. The recovery fund that the European heads of state agreed on is a one-off and temporary solution. As I said before, I think that its strength lies precisely in the fact that it is one-off and temporary, and I mean it. After all, it is the euro area countries themselves who have primary responsibility for ensuring and maintaining a healthy economy, and consequently for the reforms and investments needed to achieve that. Northern euro area countries need to reform to bring about higher wage growth and domestic demand. Southern euro area countries need to reform to become more competitive and reduce their debt burden.  But let's be realistic: this will take time. Even with the right policies in place, countries such as Greece and Italy will most likely need decades to get to where they need to be. In the coming years their levels of public debt will still be too high to weather another recession without taking far-reaching austerity measures, especially if it involves a deep euro area-wide recession. They will have to go to great lengths to maintain public investment under these circumstances. Foreign investors will not be thrilled by the prospect of a structurally higher tax burden. This means there is a risk that these countries could fall further behind again. Which would again overshadow our objective of creating a stronger monetary union.  
Fout! Onbekende naam voor documenteigenschap.  11  So, we will have to find a way to deal with these situations. To be quite honest, I don't know what the best course of action is. While the recovery fund sets a relevant precedent, we have already established that structural transfers can leave a sour taste in the mouth. Another option is to allow debt restructuring within the monetary union. This means a country meets with its main creditors, such as the banks, to discuss how to reduce its debt position without jeopardising its euro membership. However, this option is not without significant obstacles either - especially since a major proportion of this debt is still concentrated with local banks. Public debt write-downs would lead to significant losses for these local banks and possibly also trigger capital flight, and consequently still jeopardise the country's euro membership. This is roughly the scenario that played out in Greece. So both options⁠—a permanent fund as well as debt restructuring⁠—have their own, serious impediments. As long as the issue of divergent growth is not resolved, the strongest shoulders in the European caravan will from time to time have to bear a heavier load to ensure no-one gets left behind. This will require a great deal of serious thinking in the years ahead.  All in all, I believe the agenda I have outlined would put us on the way to a stronger currency union. With European governments investing in sustainable growth, both individually and working together. Through more closely aligned economic policy.  Alignment implies reciprocity, and a fair division of rights and responsibilities. For us, here in the Netherlands, it would mean having to relinquish a degree of our national autonomy. I realise that is a difficult step to take. No country is prepared to give up part of its sovereignty lightly. It takes courage. And what will we get in return? The prospect of a more stable and prosperous monetary union, in which all countries equally share the costs and benefits. Where there is a positive balance of these costs and benefits in all countries. So the atmosphere is untainted by the question of who should bear the heaviest burden. Creating a stronger feeling of goodwill in Europe and for Europe, which will make it easier to tackle together the great challenges before us today. In short, well-understood self-interest.  Some people will say: even closer European integration? Now, of all times? There's no public support for that, is there? To those people I say this. We could also choose not to work towards further European integration and more risk-sharing. That's also an option, certainly. But there is a price to pay for that option. The price involves increasing economic inequality between the euro countries, more debt crises, more emergency support and lower levels of prosperity. It would make the euro unsustainable. And I fear that in a globalised economy, this price would ultimately be paid, again, by ordinary people. The people with whom the eponym of this lecture was so concerned.  There are people who say becoming a bit worse off is a small price to pay for greater freedom.  To take back control. But is that how it really works? How much of a sovereign nation were we before the euro? When we have sold our goods abroad, haven't we always had to take our customers’ preferences into account? Our ancestors were already aware of that ages ago.   These days, that means we have to take on board international rules and regulations. We see countries like Switzerland and Norway, who are outside the European Union, in many respects have to follow European rules without having a say in how these rules are made. We see countries like Denmark and Sweden, that are not in the euro area, still striving for exchange rate stability vis-à-vis the euro. That means they generally accept the euro area interest rate policy – and also contribute to the recovery fund. And finally, we now see how the United Kingdom is struggling to find the right balance between sovereignty and free trade.   I believe more European integration is the right option. Will it be easy? No. Do we need more public support? Yes. So let us lay the foundation for that support. And to do so, policymakers must clearly present the pros and cons of European integration, and be open to discussion. They must take accountability for the decisions they make together in Brussels. And above all else, they must make sure the benefits of European cooperation are shared equally by everyone. Brexit has clearly shown us why this is absolutely necessary.  Final observations Ladies and gentlemen. Today, the Economic and Monetary Union looks quite different from what the authors of the Maastricht Treaty envisaged back in 1992. They expected the economic differences between member states to lessen over time, thanks to the introduction of the euro and supported by public finance regulations. That did not happen.  
Fout! Onbekende naam voor documenteigenschap.  12   We have drifted away from our forerunners’ expectations in a number of respects. That was inevitable. Had we decided to rigidly stick to the spirit of the Treaty during the lowest point of the crisis, we would probably no longer have a monetary union.   The world around us has also changed. The significant geopolitical shifts, the enormity of the challenges with respect to climate change and refugees. This requires more cooperation at European level.  All the same, we are living in a different monetary union than we imagined back in the 90s. With more sharing of risk. And more harmonisation of policy. In recent years we have pushed the boundaries of the Treaty. There is no guarantee that we will not have to do that again. So it is crucial to reaffirm the political mandate. But central bankers like me aren't the ones who have to make those decisions. It is up to politicians to state their preferences and to present them clearly to their voters. That is why I hope to see a spirited debate on the future of Europe in the run-up to the parliamentary elections next spring.  If we want to achieve a strong and healthy Europe that can protect its citizens against the risks hanging over them. If we want to achieve a well-functioning Europe that works for all of us. If we want to achieve a sustainable Europe that is ready for the future, then we must be willing to do what it takes. It requires us to better harmonise our economic policies, and to jointly invest in sustainable growth. Firmly based on member states assuming responsibility for putting their own house in order. With the realisation that all member states must do their bit, including the Netherlands. And with the prospect of creating a better future for us all, ultimately.   On 22 November 1989, 13 days after the fall of the Berlin Wall, Jacques Delors, European Commission President, addressed the European Parliament. He spoke of the task facing the European Community in those momentous days.   He said: “Luck helps sometimes; courage helps always.”   I wish you and our politicians much courage in the times ahead.  Thank you  ***   
            I am grateful to Alan Sheppard, Megan Bell and Zachary Morris-Dyer for their assistance preparing this speech.     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice 1      Ask not what the economy can do for insurers – ask what insurers can do for the economy  Speech given by Anna Sweeney, Executive Director, Insurance Supervision Division   Delivered at the Bank of America 25th European Financials CEO Conference 22 September 2020   
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice 2  2   Good morning and thank you to Bank of America for inviting me to speak here today.  In a normal year, I would use these remarks to run through our regulatory agenda.   But this year it is inevitable that my remarks will focus on the effects of Covid-19: a human tragedy for millions, the worst economic crisis in the UK for several centuries and an unparalleled global challenge. Our economy and the actors within it are continuing to face numerous challenges and a great deal of uncertainty. The aim of the Bank of England – along with colleagues from other public sector institutions – has been to build a bridge across the economic disruption caused by the pandemic.  And insurers – as providers of protection, as guarantors of retirement income and as institutional investors - have an important role to play in the recovery from that crisis.   With that in mind I’d like to take the opportunity today to look ahead, at the challenges and opportunities of what is waiting for us on the other side of the bridge –different, perhaps very different from the world we used to live in.  Because we face a lot of uncertainty. Not only about the speed of recovery from recession. But about the extent and depth of permanent structural changes to the functioning of our economy brought about by adaptation to Covid-19 – and as I say, with a crucial role for the insurance industry to play in our economic recovery. I want to focus today not on the specific risks that this brings to the insurance sector – though those are real and large – but on the role of the insurance sector and its regulatory framework in supporting broader economic rebuilding in a changed landscape. Not on what the economy might do to insurers, but on what insurers can do for the economy.  Of course managing your own risks and supporting the wider economy is not an either/or choice. A virtuous circle operates between the provision of financial services, and the strength of the economy, and hence the strength of the balance sheets of the providers of financial services themselves. In the case of insurance it seems likely that continued provision of new risk pooling and investment by insurers strengthens the economy and hence existing exposures on insurers’ own balance sheets. And we should expect the aggregate impact of individual firms’ decisions in a sector that at the end of 2019 held assets in the region of £2 trillion – a figure broadly equivalent to UK GDP in the same year – to be an important influence on speed of recovery and adaptation.   But what does the insurance sector do for the economy?  If I asked the person on the street about the role of insurance, I’d expect them – once they’d raised the common complaint about insurers putting premiums up every year and telling a story about a particular claim – to speak about the protection it provides to households and businesses against the financial costs resulting 
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice 3  3   from the occurrence of various risks to their physical property, health, loss of earning power or other unexpected losses. (Though maybe not using quite those words!.)  This is a very important function. Efficient transfer and pooling of risk reduces aggregate risk and by freeing individuals from risk allows them to avoid reducing consumption in favour of excess saving. And it allows businesses to put capital to work in their areas of expertise and opportunity, without having to worry about – or reserve for – risks that they are not equipped to manage or diversify, and so will not be adequately rewarded for.  It has particularly high value in current circumstances. Excess saving, reduced consumption, and heightened risk aversion would be detrimental to economic recovery. And adaptation to structural change to the economy will mean putting capital into new businesses to replace those whose business models are no longer viable. Failure of risk transfer markets in things like directors’ and officers’ indemnity and – yes – business interruption would have a cooling effect on this necessary investment.  So if a protection gap were to emerge through the reactions of insurers and insured to what they have learned about contract uncertainty, we should worry about the wider impact that that might have on economic recovery.  I do see a risk of a protection gap. The pandemic has highlighted risks around unintended exposures in insurance contracts and unexpected links across risk areas under extreme circumstances. Most acutely on business interruption insurance – where we have seen vastly different interpretations of how policies should respond to the restrictions placed on businesses as a result of  Covid-19, and the sums involved have perhaps militated against either insurer or insured settling for a compromise outcome to claims.   The high profile of disputes over business interruption claims has done nothing to dent the popular caricature of an industry that is happier to accept premiums than to pay claims. This matters: it could have an impact on  demand for policies, if businesses perceive them not in practice to offer the cover they need – not just in business interruption, but in indemnity policies that cover non-specific perils. This in turn could create a drag on real economic activity and productive investment that cannot take place without appropriate insurance coverage.  Equally, there is a risk that supply will be curtailed. As a result of potentially large and unintended accumulations, insurers will naturally take actions to limit their future exposure. This could be in the form of tighter policy wordings, exclusions, withdrawal of capacity or significant price rises, reducing the availability and affordability of non-specific peril cover and creating an increasingly concentrated market. For example we know that on average, D&O (Directors’ and Officers’ protection) premiums have doubled this year.1 To some extent this is of course individually sensible risk management, and it is right that insurers consider the broader lessons from recent events about the potential contract uncertainty within their portfolios, and take                                                       1 See Financial Times article (September 2020): 'Cost of insuring board directors from lawsuits doubles in Covid era' 
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice 4  4   steps to reduce this. But there is a risk of excessive risk aversion and an overshoot leading to an aggregate reduction in supply that damages recovery.  It is not impossible to transform a seemingly uninsurable peril into a diversifiable, insurable one. Cyber risk is a helpful example. A severe, global cyber event causing systemic losses is considered uninsurable – the risk does not diversify, and the industry’s capital could never be sufficient. There are a number of industry initiatives across the world to explore further public-private partnerships to provide ultimate backstop for systemic losses. Clearly there is a limit to the size of losses that private insurance capital can cover, and it is worth exploring whether an explicit public-private backstop along similar lines to Pool and Flood Re in the UK is one way of mitigating the risk of a shock to supply of insurance.  But we should be mindful of the risk of moral hazard and of crowding out private capital. To return to the example of cyber risk, the industry is now able to provide explicit cyber cover for those aspects of the risk that are insurable such as recoverability, physical damage and the cost of notification of lost records. And we know there is appetite in the market to keep the insurance business model relevant and seek out alternative sources of profit by underwriting new risks.  As investors in longer-term, illiquid assets, insurance companies are well suited to support the UK’s economic recovery  As this audience will be well aware, the industry’s contribution to the economy goes further than transfer and pooling of physical and financial risk. The life insurance sector plays important roles:  First, providing the security of income in retirement not only to current retirees – via in payment annuities – but also to future retirees – via deferred annuities and savings products; confidence in security of income both current and prospective supports spending and demand for goods and services in the real economy. Secondly, life insurers channel savings into long term investment. Through these functions the life sector also has a crucial role to play helping the economy to emerge from the pandemic and adapt to potentially profound structural change.  Whilst Covid-19 has created new financial risks on both the asset and liabilities sides of insurers’ balance sheets, there are also opportunities for insurers as investors in a wide range of long-term high quality illiquid assets, such as infrastructure, which are key to supporting recovery and adaptation.   These may extend to the even bigger structural change of transition to a zero carbon economy necessary to avoid the worst impact of climate change. This, by the way, is another example of how providing financial services to the wider economy – in this case financing low carbon alternative technologies, has a positive feedback to balance sheet strength by reducing risks on both the asset and liability sides.2                                                       2 See speech by Anna Sweeney (2020): Paving the way forward: Managing climate risk in the insurance sector 
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice 5  5    Following the crisis some companies will enter the recovery phase with more highly leveraged balance sheets, some from a starting point that was arguably itself over-leveraged.   And structural change will create opportunities for new enterprises, often better financed with equity than debt. In his June remit letter to the Chancellor, the Governor made the case for introducing more equity, or more equity-like finance to the mix.3 Equity issuance by public listed companies is already strong and at its highest level so far this year compared to the same point in any year in the past decade.4   With their long-term liabilities, insurance companies and pension funds are well suited investors in growth capital. For some time now, insurers have been increasingly turning to illiquid assets for a good return on their investments at a time of historically and enduringly low yields. This trend has been most noticeable for annuity providers, incentivised by the matching adjustment (MA) to invest in assets that, perhaps with some restructuring, mirror the illiquid nature and fixed cashflows of their liabilities. But much of this investment has been in, or backed by property. UK insurance companies only allocate around 2% of their assets to unlisted equity.5 This is a smaller share than many of their European peers.  But liability structures are very different between national markets too, which will contribute to differences in asset allocations. The regulator’s concern here is to ensure that any increase in insurers’ asset allocations to long term, productive investments does not endanger policyholder protection, that is to say does not compromise the first , equally important function of life insurance that I set out earlier, namely the provision of security of retirement income.6  Annuities are not a good match for investments with equity-like characteristics. A fundamental principle of the MA is that some of the market risk on the backing assets is neutralized, by virtue of matching. That can never be the case with a long term real asset like common equity, and no amount of clever restructuring will alter that. Much of the new productive investment needed will be financed outside matching portfolios and indeed outside insurance.  That said, any reform of the MA that might arise from the Solvency 2 review might nonetheless play a part in unlocking more funding for things like infrastructure. In its current manifestation, the MA was designed and calibrated with simple, fixed, tradable assets in mind. We have been flexible in our implementation, but the size of the benefit offered by the MA and the relatively coarse framework for measuring levels of retained asset risk have necessitated strict eligibility conditions.                                                        3 See June 2020 FPC remit response letter  4 See speech by Alex Brazier (2020): ‘Protecting economic muscle: Finance and the Covid crisis’ 5 See speech by Alex Brazier (2020): ‘Protecting economic muscle: Finance and the Covid crisis’ 6 See speech by David Rule (2018): 'An annuity is a very serious business' 
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice 6  6   It is extremely difficult to model the behaviour of long-dated, illiquid assets, particularly under economic stress. The size of the MA benefit that a firm can take on its liabilities is driven by the credit rating assigned to its assets, which in turn depends on correctly assessing the risk of default or downgrade – an assessment which may be performed by an external rating agency, or by the insurer itself.  Furthermore, when firms stress their balance sheet to calculate capital requirements they have to consider the impact of changes to the MA under stress. This means making assumptions about the impact of a stressed economic environment on default and downgrade risks, on ratings migration, and on the cost of  re-establishing an MA-compliant position if necessary. Each step introduces the possibility of inappropriate or over-optimistic assumptions and therefore inadequate capital.  If an asset is rated too optimistically a firm may be holding insufficient reserves to meet the risk of default or downgrade. Insurers face the challenge that ratings for illiquid assets are generally more uncertain and less reliable. They are usually assigned internally, rather than publicly, and invariably rely on less data than is available for traded investments.  So, if we are to expand eligibility – ideally to the full range of assets that are suitable to back annuities in a properly diversified portfolio – but without reducing security of retirement income, then the MA benefit – which is very large and binary – needs to be more graduated, and tailored better to the specific risk characteristics of those assets. In particular, the varying balance between  short-term risks, to which buy and hold investors are not exposed to, and longer term  risks which they do retain. This varies a lot more across the reasonable universe of assets suitable to back annuities than the current design and calibration of the MA allows for. We expect the calibration of the framework will need to be more granular than it currently is and will need the flexibility to respond prudently when firms expand into further new asset classes with novel risk characteristics. A reform like this could support investment without compromising policyholder protection.   Of course, the outcome of the S2 review is ultimately a matter for the Treasury. From our point of view, while there is no agenda to increase capital levels, neither do we start from the viewpoint that the sector is obviously overcapitalised. We would expect that there will be significant changes at the level of individual measures, most notably the risk margin which we all agree is mis-calibrated for longer term liabilities, at current low levels of interest rates.7   And of course while dealing with the current regulatory regime we must be careful not to lose sight of our longer term forward-looking priorities: the impact of climate change and measures to mitigate this; the growing importance of Fintech and the role of shifting demographics across the globe.    Conclusion                                                       7 See June 2018 letter from Sam Woods to Treasury Select Committee 
     All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches and @BoE_PressOffice 7  7    I began these remarks by highlighting three things that insurers do for the wider economy:   Provide protection for significant financial losses;  Channel investment into a wide range of assets; and  Provide security of retirement income in the form of savings and annuities, facilitating stable demand for goods and services.  On the first, there is a critical role for insurers to adapt and ensure they are able to meet customers’ insurance needs, particularly during the transition out of the crisis and also into the longer term. Firms should take early steps to assess what this could mean for their current business models. It would be in no one’s interests for the experience of the Covid-19 crisis and responsiveness of business interruption cover to reduce consumer confidence in the value provided by insurance for financial protection.  In the life insurance sector there is an opportunity for firms to leverage their position as long-term investors in a wide range of assets and productive investment, to support our economic recovery but this must not come at the expense of policyholder protection and the provision of secure retirement income. We would expect to preserve the current, adequate level of capital in the sector whilst seeking to reduce complexity and frictional costs within the regime.  A financially resilient, competitive and productive insurance sector not only ensures that individual policyholders are protected, but signals an industry that is able to support the recovery of the wider economy whilst maintaining high prudential standards.   
         Challenges for the Spanish economy in the face of the impact of the pandemic Webinar Economy, work and society in Spain. The impact of COVID-19. Spanish Economic and Social Council (CES) Pablo Hernández de Cos Governor       23.07.2020  
     1  Honourable Minister for Labour and Social Economy, Chair of the Spanish Economic and Social Council, ladies and gentlemen, Good morning. It is a pleasure to be able to participate today in this presentation of the Annual Report of the Economic and Social Council (CES). As earlier highlighted, its content goes beyond the 2019 timeframe of events and delves into the challenges that the COVID-19 pandemic entails for the economy, for social cohesion and for the labour market in Spain. In this respect, the CES and the Banco de España have concurred in recent weeks that our respective studies and annual reports should strive to be useful instruments that help society face these challenging times. An incipient, incomplete, uncertain and uneven recovery  The COVID-19 pandemic has exacted a very high price in terms of human lives as well as deep-seated disruption to society and the economy. As a result, the dynamics marking the global and Spanish economic environment in late 2019 and early 2020 have been abruptly altered. Specifically, the pandemic and the lockdown measures to combat it have affected all economies most adversely.  In Spain’s case, in a setting in which the state of alert affected the last two weeks of Q1, we witnessed the biggest-ever contraction in GDP historically in a single quarter, namely a quarter-on-quarter rate of 5.2%. This decline was one of the most pronounced in the euro area, and was in response to several circumstances. These included a relatively greater severity of the lockdown measures (given, too, the greater intensity of the pandemic) and the presence of certain structural factors in our economy that make it more vulnerable to a shock of these characteristics. The most significant factor here is perhaps the high weight of the tourism-related sectors, which have been particularly affected by the social distancing measures. The reduction in hours worked, estimated at 5% in Q1, was also the biggest-ever in the time series and highlights the marked impact of the various measures affecting movement on the labour market in the early stages of this crisis.  Admittedly, the restrictions on movement were gradually eased as from early May. But the state of alert ran for much of Q2, whereby a notable increase in the decline in GDP and in employment in this period is to be expected. The latest Banco de España macroeconomic projections, published in June against a background of unusually high uncertainty, posted estimates of quarter-on-quarter declines in activity in a range between -16% and -21.8%. And the information since available tends to confirm that the decline in economic activity in Q2 as a whole will have been in this range.  That said, an improving path could be seen throughout Q2, in tandem with the ongoing gradual reopening of the economy. At present, then, we are witnessing an incipient recovery in the economy, which, however, is still incomplete, uncertain and uneven.  The correlation of this economic activity during Q2 with the intensity of the restrictions on people’s movement in force at each point in time was very high. Thus, some indicators that measure people’s movements hit record lows in the first two weeks of April, with declines of around 80% in motorway traffic and fuel consumption, and of over 90% in the case of airport traffic. This was reflected in the high-frequency indicators of economic activity in the weeks in which the lockdown was stricter; then, for example, we saw reductions in electricity 
     2  consumption by firms and in consumer spending paid using cards of approximately 30% and 60%, respectively. For April as a whole, there was an unprecedented event in the time series when some variables fell practically to zero. This was the case of new car registrations and international tourist inflows, the latter variable obviously being closely related to the restrictions on personal movement. Since early May, and to a greater extent in June, the progressively staggered and region-based easing of the lockdown measures prompted a gradual recovery in the mobility indicators and, in tandem, in economic activity indicators. This was particularly so in the final stretch of the lockdown-easing process when trips between provinces in different regions and the arrival of foreign tourists from the Schengen area were once again permitted.  However, it is worth noting the role that voluntary limitations on movement probably continue to play. These mean that movement is still some way off full normalisation, especially as regards international movements, which are so important for a country such as Spain where, as you know, the significance of tourism within the productive structure is so high.  In late June, the volume of air traffic was still 65% down on the previous year. The recovery has been more patent in the mobility indicators, which tend mainly to reflect national movements (such as motorway traffic), or the indicators constructed with mobile telephony data, which include trips to workplaces, retail establishments or leisure centres, with year-on-year reductions of around 15% in all instances.  This path of partial recovery in mobility has been reflected in the high-frequency indicators of economic activity, whose year-on-year declines have progressively eased. By way of example, the fall in electricity consumption by firms is expected to have eased between the opening weeks in April and the final weeks in June by close to 20 pp, to around - 10%.  Likewise, the progressive re-opening of commercial establishments deemed non-essential since early May prompted a pick-up in retail sales that month, more markedly so in the case of products whose sales were more affected during the lockdown, such as personal equipment goods, home equipment and motor fuel. This improvement in consumer spending is expected to have run into June, according to the information available on payments made using cards. Throughout Q2, the labour market moved on a path of recovery similar to that described for economic activity. Consequently, the fall in Social Security registrations eased in May and, especially in June, following the heavy declines recorded in the second half of March and in April.  In any event, registrations provide a partial picture of the scale of the labour market adjustment since the start of the crisis, insofar as the workers affected by furlough-like schemes (ERTEs) continue to be considered as registered, despite the fact they are not contributing to production. For a truer assessment of changes in the labour force since the onset of the crisis, regard is had to the series of registrations after having stripped out workers subject to ERTEs. This series, which might be dubbed “actual registrations”, is estimated to have shown a year-on-year decline of 22% at end-April, with much sharper reductions in some of the services segments most affected by the restrictions on movement 
     3  associated with the state of alert, such as the hospitality sector. As of late June, the annual decline in actual registrations is estimated to have eased, such that the level of actual registrations was 11.4% down on the figure a year earlier. Should the epidemiological situation not change significantly, the recovery observed in Q2 will continue over the summer and give rise to high quarter-on-quarter growth in Q3. Nonetheless, interpreting this growth calls for caution, since we should not lose sight of the fact that the level of activity will continue to be significantly below that observed prior to the pandemic breaking, such that the process of recovery will be far from complete. We can thus talk of an incomplete recovery, using the first of the three adjectives I referred to at the start of my address. The conditioning factors I mention for the short-term outlook to materialise - the absence of any material changes in the course of the pandemic in Spain - are no minor matter. Indeed, economic developments would be adversely affected in the coming months, perhaps severely so, if the outbreaks seen in recent weeks in different territories after the easing of the restrictions on movement could not be controlled with local-level and temporary measures. Accordingly, health-related uncertainties will persist for some time until effective treatment for the illness or widespread access to a vaccine against the virus are achieved. Moreover, the doubts over economic developments in the coming quarters are not confined to the health area. In particular, along with the adverse impact that the social distancing measures we may have to maintain in the future may exert on activity, there is a further effect. This is more difficult to measure a priori and relates to the possible and potentially persistent changes in agents’ behaviour in response to the “new normal”. These changes might include modified patterns of consumption and saving, or changes in supply chains or in certain aspects of firms’ operations. All these considerations would warrant qualifying the current recovery as uncertain, to take the second of the adjectives I used earlier to characterise this recovery.  Additionally, from the standpoint of the sectors of activity, not all of them suffered on a comparable scale the consequences of the pandemic lockdown measures, as they are not equally susceptible to the imposition of social distancing measures. And the gradual start-up in activity is not taking place at the same pace in the different sectors. The earlier normalisation of manufacturing and of certain services coexists alongside a slower than usual recovery in levels of activity in those other services, such as leisure and hospitality, where personal interaction is greater. Here, full normalisation is not likely to be attained until we have an effective medical solution. These differences in the pace at which normal levels of activity in productive sectors are being restored allows us to characterise this recovery as uneven, taking the last of my three adjectives. The economic policy response in this second phase of the crisis  Naturally, the economic policy response to this crisis should adapt to how the pandemic unfolds healthwise. At this second phase of the crisis, with the characteristics I mentioned, the economic policy response must combine two objectives: to support the recovery - which advises avoiding a premature withdrawal of the support measures that would raise the risk of economic growth undergoing more lasting damage - and to smooth the adjustment of the economy to the post-pandemic scenario. 
     4  The importance of European support  To achieve these objectives, the economic policy response in this second phase of the crisis should have the firmly resolute backing of the European Union (EU). Indeed, given the enormous economic and financial interactions across the area’s various economies, joint action is the most effective means of ensuring that the economic effects of the pandemic will be overcome in a shorter time and at a lower cost to each and every country. This is particularly important in the current situation, where we face a global crisis, but which is exerting asymmetrical economic effects on the different countries. European action is particularly important so as to avoid an uneven exit from the crisis that bears down on overall economic growth for a longer period. These arguments, beyond those relating to necessary European solidarity, highlight the importance of the agreement reached by the European Council last Tuesday with the approval of the European recovery fund.  In fact, as you know, the result of the European Council meeting some days back was, I would venture to say, most satisfactory. First, agreement was reached on the EU multiyear budget for 2021-2027, the negotiations for which had faced many difficulties in recent months, for an amount of €1,074 billion. Further, a recovery fund (Next Generation EU) has been created. This is additional to the budget and introduces a pan-European recovery financing framework that is unprecedented in the history of the EU. This fund will be financed by the European Commission’s recourse, on behalf of the Union, to the capital markets, for a maximum amount of €750 billion between 2021 and 2026, i.e. it is temporary in nature. The funds will be assigned to tackle the consequences of the COVID-19 crisis, both through loans to the Member States (48% of the total) and through direct transfers (essentially the remaining 52%). The gradual amortisation of this debt will run to 2058, through new EU own resources.   To swiftly mobilise the aid, which will take the form of investment project financing and structural reforms, in areas such as research, progress in digitalisation and combating climate change, the European Commission will, before the European Council’s October meeting, submit proposals on how to accelerate and smooth procedures in the Member States. According to the draft agreement, the legal spending commitments attached to the projects included in Next Generation EU shall be made, at the latest, by 31 December 2023, and the related payments will have to be made effective, at the latest, by end-2026. More specifically, 70% of the transfers should be committed during the 2021-2022 two-year period, with a country-based distribution factor that depends on the unemployment rate in 2015-2019, population and the country’s per capita income. The remaining 30% must be committed before end-2023, and the distribution factor will be adapted to incorporate more directly the heterogeneous impact of the health crisis. Thus, the unemployment rate will be replaced by a variable that will weight, in equal portions, the decline in GDP in 2020 and the cumulative decline in GDP in 2020-2021.    In sum, the fund will enable, at least in part, a balance to be struck between the potential and real financial divergences among the European partners. This is because it will benefit from the positive externalities arising from joint action and it will serve to engineer a coordinated exit from the crisis, based on common budgetary instruments. The financing of the fund through Community debt will benefit from the favourable low-interest-rate environment and will prevent this new debt being assumed by Member States individually, under conditions which, in some cases, would be foreseeably more unfavourable than those 
     5  which are expected to be applied to this pooled instrument. Given the novel nature of the instrument, its amount and the difficulties in reaching agreements in the EU on such multi-faceted matters, I must say that the outcome is very satisfactory in terms of underscoring the shared will to move the European project forward.   The challenge now is to convert these funds that will be made available to countries into a fiscal impulse that accompanies and steers the recovery effort needed in our productive system. In this connection it would be advisable to prioritise, in the short term, public investment projects in innovation, technological capital, education and lifelong learning, and projects that contribute to the transition to a more sustainable economy, in line with the strategic guidelines recently laid down by the European authorities.   The fact that the recovery fund agreed by the Council focuses on medium and long-term objectives means there is still a significant need in the short term to fund the Member States’ budgetary effort in combating the effects of the pandemic. Also, in the medium term it remains necessary to equip the EU with an appropriate institutional framework to address the asymmetrical effect of economic shocks, e.g. through the launch of a common budgetary macroeconomic stabilisation capacity, a cyclical stabilisation function or a pan-European unemployment insurance scheme. That would influence greater pooling of resources and risks in the budgetary arena and would enhance the resilience of the Union as a whole to negative shocks. Reducing the European economy’s vulnerability to future shocks will also call for continuing progress towards a full Banking Union and a Capital Markets Union. The necessary support of the European Central Bank  On this occasion, and unlike previous crises, the approval of the European recovery fund will prevent the European response to the crisis in the euro area from resting exclusively on the common monetary policy.  The European Central Bank (ECB) has deployed a range of emergency measures during this crisis. These have involved, first, the extension of sovereign and corporate bond purchases in the euro area, with the aim of improving financing conditions. Specifically, the ECB has increased its pre-existing purchase programme and added a new emergency programme currently worth €1.35 trillion (11.3% of euro area GDP in 2019) and which will last, at least, until June 2021. One new feature is the fact that asset purchases under the new programme are being made with a high degree of flexibility regarding their distribution over time and across asset classes, and, in the specific case of public asset purchases, also as regards the issuing countries. As a result, the Eurosystem is focusing its purchases there where they are most needed at each point in time. The aim is to ensure the smooth transition of the single monetary policy to all countries in the area and to head off the risks of financial fragmentation. The ECB has also made its liquidity provision facilities more accessible to the banking sector, in terms both of cost and volume, and it has relaxed the requirements made of assets pledged as collateral, in order to smooth financing to households, firms and the self-employed.   All these measures have been effective in alleviating the financial tensions generated by the crisis. These tensions took the form of a strong rise in sovereign and corporate debt yields, which were then largely reversed. The ECB’s action has also helped keep bank lending flows 
     6  to companies notably robust in recent months and contributed to their cost holding at low levels. Also crucial for these dynamics have been the government-implemented public guarantee programmes for bank lending. The ECB measures have further provided considerable room for manoeuvre for national authorities.  In this second phase of the crisis, in which the recovery in economic activity is, as I said, incomplete, fragile and uneven across sectors in countries, actual inflation and inflation expectations are holding at very low levels. And it is to be expected in the medium term that the weakness of demand will continue exerting downward pressure on prices. Against this background, on the ECB Governing Council we have made it clear that a high degree of monetary accommodation is needed to support the recovery and safeguard our price stability objective. Specifically, we have reiterated our commitment to do what it takes to support the euro area economy in these extremely difficult circumstances. That includes ensuring that the common monetary policy is properly transmitted to all sectors of the economy and to all countries, and to prevent the financial fragmentation of the area. We also stand ready to adapt all our instruments should it be necessary.  Naturally, we must also remain vigilant regarding the risks to financial stability. Evidently, the banking sector is facing this crisis from a healthier position than in the previous recession, which highlights the importance of the far-reaching changes made in this sector over the past decade. The ECB has also taken resolute action here. Among other measures, it has allowed banks to use the capital buffers available, which were created precisely for situations such as the present one. But, undoubtedly, the crisis will significantly impact the quality of banks’ credit portfolios, on a scale that will depend on its ultimate severity and which will be uneven across banks. The outcome will depend on banks’ starting position, on their business model and on the distribution of their exposures to the sectors and regions most affected by the pandemic. Accordingly, we supervisors must continue to closely monitor the risks to financial stability and we must be ready to provide a forceful, pan-European response should such risks materialise. In short, European and national economic authorities must share the objective of preventing the current crisis from being accompanied by an across-the-board tightening of financing conditions or from seriously harming the stability of the financial system. We are well aware that crises that incorporate a significant financial downturn are usually deeper and longer-lasting. The health crisis will directly affect the profitability of the European banking sector. Such profitability was already low before the crisis broke, and events have highlighted the need to tackle even more urgently certain challenges, such as those associated with digitalisation, the management of cybersecurity risks, reputational risks and those relating to climate change. This underscores the importance of making further headway in improving banking efficiency. Given the extraordinarily prevalent role played by this sector in the Spanish and European economy, how successfully these challenges are resolved will notably influence the intensity and sustainability of economic growth in the coming years.  The importance of an extension and selective adaptation of national stimulus measures  In the national economic policy arena, achieving the dual aim of supporting the recovery and smoothing the adjustment of the economy to the post-pandemic scenario calls for two actions. First, the authorities must extend and regularly recalibrate some of the 
     7  measures already applied, which will have to be more closely focused now on the groups of firms, sectors and individuals most affected. And further, their design should enable the structural adjustments needed ahead of the new post-pandemic environment to be brought about.  Allow me to illustrate this idea in relation to two measures that have been particularly important in recent months: the policies on guarantees and on ERTEs. Indeed, the notable reduction in business activity further to the restrictions associated with the state of alert prompted a much sharper decline in non-financial corporations’ operating revenue than that in the payments they must meet. The latest Central Balance Sheet Data Office figures give an idea of the severity of this shock to firms’ liquidity. There was a strongly adverse impact on these agents’ profits already in Q1, despite the fact that the sharp contractions in activity and operating revenue associated with the declaration of the state of alert only affected the last two weeks of this quarter. The reduction in the return on assets for the overall sample of firms was so significant that it pushed ROA below the cost of borrowing, a development not seen since 2014. The information on bank lending shows firms resorting to this source of financing to cover a large portion of these liquidity requirements. Specifically, the outstanding balance of bank financing granted to Spanish non-financial corporations rose to 8.7% in May after having shrunk by 1.1% year-on-year in February. And the preliminary data for June would suggest that this trajectory has been holding in the most recent period.  Yet for financial institutions to have been able to meet such a notable increase in firms’ applications for credit, the contribution of the support measures launched at both the European and national levels has been decisive. On one hand, banks have been able to gain access to the ECB’s long-term financing under most advantageous conditions thanks to the purpose-built programmes introduced by the ECB. On the other, the public guarantees on loans to firms and the self-employed approved by the Government have contributed to lessening financial institutions’ potential reluctance to take new risks on board in such an uncertain setting.  Analyses by the Banco de España based on the evidence available suggest that these guarantee facilities are, in particular, paving the way for the financing both of firms facing greater difficulty gaining access to credit and of small enterprises, marked by having been affected by the impact of the health crisis and for having a greater risk profile. Thanks to the guarantees, SMEs have been able to finance themselves in recent months under more favourable conditions in terms of the interest rate, the amount of credit and, above all, the maturity of the operation, which on average has stood at close to five years.  The role of lending to companies in the current crisis is thus proving to be of great importance. It is contributing to reducing the risk of bankruptcy for firms that are viable but which face temporary liquidity problems, with the adverse consequences this would have in terms of job destruction and damage to the productive system, and, in sum, to the robustness and momentum of the economic recovery.  
     8  The launch of the new ICO (Official Credit Institute) line of guarantees, recently announced by the Government and worth €40 billion, will significantly reinforce at a most timely juncture this important instrument for combating the economic effects of the pandemic.  Against this backdrop, the findings of the latest Bank Lending Survey anticipate the possibility of a tightening of credit standards for European firms in Q3 this year. Should this be confirmed, prolonged or increased support measures for the financing of firms would be advisable, in order to sustain the recovery. In any event, in this second phase of the economic policy response, credit support mechanisms should focus on prioritising access to these funds for firms with sound viability prospects, with a view to providing for the necessary cross-firm and cross-sector reallocation of productive resources. Likewise, it is admittedly highly likely that a significant number of firms will emerge from this crisis with high debt levels and with diminished demand prospects, at least for some time. In this respect, it is also a pressing concern to review corporate restructuring and insolvency processes, with the aim of establishing pre-emptive, flexible and simplified administrative procedures enabling firms to pursue their business activity while they are still viable.  The second decisive contribution of economic policies to alleviating the consequences of the crisis has been the use of furlough arrangements (ERTEs). This has also been a very important instrument for mitigating firms’ liquidity needs. But, above all, it has been a key tool for ensuring the maintenance of affected employees’ income and for improving the prospects of recouping employment once the restrictions on activity imposed by the state of alert are lifted. The particular characteristics of this shock, which temporarily shut down many workplaces, and the incentives approved for the use of this instrument after the state of alert was declared have contributed to a much greater resort to ERTEs than in past crises.  Hence, if we focus on the arrangements available for permanent employees, at end-April the number of workers affected by an ERTE totalled 3.4 million. Since then, this figure has fallen significantly. Moreover, on the information available, only a very small portion of wage-earners who have emerged from this situation have gone into unemployment or become idle, whereas most of those affected have returned to their pre-crisis job. These developments are qualitatively consistent with the objective pursued; namely, that ERTEs would be a temporarily used tool while the transitory shutdown in activity lasted. In late June, coinciding with the end of lockdown-easing, 1.8 million workers continued to avail themselves of an ERTE. This figure is almost half the end-April peak and accounts for close to 10% of total wage-earners, confirming that one of the characteristics of this recovery is its incompleteness. From the standpoint of the labour market, what we have is also an uneven recovery. This is because the reduction in the number of workers on ERTEs has been very uneven across the productive sectors. With lockdown-easing having concluded, some services segments are still affected by restrictions on operating normally, and the proportion of workers affected by furlough arrangements continues to be a majority. This is the case of the accommodation, air transport and travel agency segments where, at end-June, the reach of ERTEs was still between 70.4% and 53.7%. The very high proportion of workers protected by an ERTE in these specific services segments is in striking contrast to the 
     9  percentages in manufacturing industry and construction (8.9% and 4.2%, respectively). That highlights the deeply asymmetric effects of this crisis on different productive activities. In absolute terms, at the end of Q2 almost half the workers on ERTEs were in the retail and hospitality sectors. In response to this situation and to the high uncertainty over the recovery, the ERTE support measures - initially programmed to end-June - have been extended, albeit with amendments, to the end of Q3. The new conditions include the possibility of increasing Social Security exemptions in the event of a fresh outbreak of the virus, which is an explicit acknowledgement of the uncertainty surrounding the recovery. These new conditions also attempt to square the objective to continue providing support to firms and workers temporarily affected by restrictions on operating normally with the aim of providing incentives for a progressive reallocation of employment towards activities with a better future outlook.  In parallel with the role of ERTEs, it is important to ensure the proper functioning of the different labour flexibility mechanisms available to firms, whose function is particularly useful in these circumstances for efficiently accomplishing the adjustments arising from the crisis.  Active labour market and training policies for the unemployed and workers affected by ERTEs also take on considerable importance. Once suitably re-designed, these policies should be geared to boosting employability and smoothing the relocation of the workers most affected by the crisis to sectors or firms with greater growth potential. The criteria whereby support instruments are maintained, but after being appropriately designed so as not to distort the necessary adjustments in the economy, are also important. And particularly so those expressly intended to sustain the income of the most vulnerable households. The necessary implementation of an ambitious structural reform agenda  Let us look beyond the policies needed in this phase of incipient economic recovery. Taking a broader view, the extraordinarily complex setting envisaged by the Banco de España’s latest economic projections - and those of the vast majority of analysts - for the coming years also means we should define a reform agenda aimed at tackling the structural challenges our economy faces, and which this crisis has made more pressing. In this setting, an ambitious reform strategy would be an essential lever for positioning the Spanish economy on a sustainable path of growth, job creation and well-being.  One of the key structural challenges is that relating to the need to increase our economy’s growth potential. Before the pandemic broke, Banco de España estimates had placed the Spanish economy’s growth potential slightly above 1% per annum. It is too soon to accurately assess the scale of the damage the current crisis will cause to this potential growth. But, unquestionably, the impact will be negative and, therefore, our growth capacity looking ahead might be lower than that estimated before the crisis.  The main factor behind the Spanish economy’s modest potential growth is, undoubtedly, the low structural growth of total factor productivity. These differences should not be underestimated, since productivity gains are a fundamental ingredient for achieving a 
     10  sustainable increase in a country’s economic well-being. Indeed, the greater these gains are, the greater the possibilities of raising wage levels and the quality of the jobs created, along with increasing the resources for funding public policies.  It is thus necessary to address the various structural aspects which, across the board, restrict productivity gains. In this connection, we must improve the quantity and quality of public and private investment in human and technological capital, revise our educational model and promote business growth and dynamism. Elsewhere, labour market duality, a very high structural unemployment rate and high long-term unemployment not only restrict our growth capacity but also contribute to increasing inequality. In fact, since 1980 the unemployment rate in Spain has averaged almost 17%, a figure far higher than that observed in other European countries. Moreover, however, unemployment in Spain has historically shown very marked cyclical changes: in episodes of crisis, the unemployment rate has easily exceeded 20%. This means that each recession expulses extensive groups of workers from the market, particularly those with less work experience, low skills and, generally, those on temporary contracts and, therefore, with a lower degree of protection. True, the marked temporary employment ratio in the Spanish labour market shows its most damaging effects in periods of crisis. But it also has adverse economic effects in expansionary phases (e.g. in terms of firms’ and workers’ human capital investment decisions). In addition, insofar as the temporary employment ratio is essentially affecting the young, whose unemployment rate is very high, this Spanish labour market shortcoming also influences key decisions in people’s life cycle such as those relating to household formation. For all these reasons, reducing the high duality of our labour market is, in my view, an inescapable objective. Thus, employment protection mechanisms should be reviewed under the prism of squaring employee protection with flexibility needs, but, above all, with the aim of achieving a fairer distribution of protection among workers with a different contract status. We should also recall how, before the current crisis, almost 43% of the unemployed had been seeking a job for more than a year and that around 30% had been looking for more than two years. The situation will worsen with the current crisis, whereby it is vital to strengthen the role of policies aimed at increasing the employability of the more vulnerable workers and preventing unemployment from becoming structural.  It is worth noting here that the sectors potentially most affected by this crisis (among which transport, hospitality, leisure and retail) account for almost 20% of employment in our country. But, moreover, these sectors evidence a greater concentration of less skilled workers who are less exposed to IT-, numeracy- and literacy-related tasks. That hampers the employability of these workers in other productive sectors that foreseeably have better growth prospects in the near future. Improving active labour market policies is also necessary over the medium-term horizon. Undoubtedly, technological advances (artificial intelligence, automation and robotics) will create new opportunities and will contribute to much-needed gains in productivity. But some workers will lose their jobs in this transition and will not always be in a position to instantly take advantage of new opportunities. Accordingly, active labour 
     11  market and training policies, duly re-designed to boost their effectiveness and efficiency, and with the appropriate funds behind them, are a natural lever for ensuring lifelong-learning for workers. This will enable them to acquire new skills, to hone them and to recycle themselves professionally in a changing and foreseeably very demanding environment in terms of technological skills.  In sum, these and other reforms should contribute to increasing the economy’s growth potential. And along with income-sustaining measures (such as the minimum living income), they will help reduce inequality in Spain. Inequality levels, which were higher at the onset of this crisis than at the start of the previous one, will probably rise further in the coming quarters, given that this crisis is affecting groups with relatively low incomes to a greater extent. Nor can we forget the need to address ongoing population ageing which, among other aspects, will most appreciably influence the behaviour of the labour market, growth dynamics and the main fiscal magnitudes in the coming decades. It is also a first-order challenge for our pension system.  And, of course, the Spanish economy must be nimble and proactive so as to harness the new opportunities that arise from combating climate change and from the transition to a more sustainable economy, from the changes in the globalisation model and from the foreseeable acceleration in the digitalisation of the economy. The prompt design of a medium-term fiscal consolidation programme for gradual implementation once the crisis is behind us  After the pandemic, the Spanish economy will post the highest levels of public debt in many decades, partly as a result of the necessary fiscal expansion in the short term. Accordingly, it is also necessary to design a plan to restore health to the public finances in the medium term, the application of which, in any event, will have to be postponed until the recovery is firmly rooted. Otherwise, persistently high public debt/GDP ratios will leave us chronically vulnerable to the possibility of adverse macrofinancial shocks arising in the future.  This programme should include a clear definition of the budgetary objectives and their timeframe, along with details of the measures needed to attain them. It should also be based on a prudent forecast of macroeconomic developments. Further, it should include an appropriate response to possible slippage, and be compatible with an improvement in the quality of public finances. In this respect, it will be a priority on the expenditure side to subject the various items to exhaustive review, with the aim of identifying the areas in which there is room to improve efficiency. It is important that the recommendations further to AIReF’s assessments be taken into account as soon as possible.  We also need a comprehensive review of the tax system, in order to improve its revenue-raising capacity and its efficiency. Comparison with the other European countries can guide us here. And, once again, the results of AIReF’s recently published review of tax benefits are a significant contribution in this connection. 
     12  Conclusions In sum, following an unprecedented recession, we face a gradual recovery in the economy, which is still incomplete and uneven, and subject to high uncertainty. Against this background, the ECB’s actions since the onset of this crisis and the recent approval of the European recovery plan are also an unprecedented common European response. For this response to be effective, it must be accompanied by national economic policy responses befitting the European action and the challenges we face. This response calls for the following: to maintain the support of fiscal policy to the economy, on a temporary basis, focusing on the groups of firms, sectors and individuals most affected and with a design that allows for the structural adjustments needed; to convert the European funds into a fiscal impulse that accompanies and steers the recovery effort of our productive system; to urgently implement an ambitious, comprehensive, lasting and assessable strategy of reforms that tackles the structural challenges of our economy; and, finally, to design a medium-term fiscal consolidation programme, for gradual implementation once the economic crisis caused by the pandemic is behind us, that ensures the sustainability of our public finances and enables fiscal buffers to be built up for use in future recessionary episodes.  The future well-being of our country depends on an economic policy strategy that combines these principles. Thus, as I have stressed on other occasions, there should in my opinion be a high degree of consensus among the various political, economic and social agents regarding the guiding principles of this strategy, so that the foundations on which our growth rests are predictable and lasting.  Thank you.  
Dimitar Radev: The banks entered the current crisis well-preparedthanks to what has been done in recent yearsSpeech by Mr Dimitar Radev, Governor of the Bulgarian National Bank, at the opening of thejubilee academic year at the UNWE, Sofia, 14 September 2020.*   *   *Dear Colleagues,Dear Guests,Thank you most sincerely for this opportunity to take part in the opening of the new academicyear at the University of National and World Economy (UNWE). This academic year coincideswith the remarkable 100th anniversary of our university. This is a good opportunity to once againexpress our gratitude to the generations of professors, students, administrators, and to all thosewho helped the UNWE become what it is today – the biggest, the oldest and the mostrespectable business university in Southeast Europe.This year is unique and not for very positive reasons, including the health crisis which turned intoan economic one, and the complicated political situation. Due to these developments we arefaced with very difficult challenges, the true response to which must be institutional. In thissense, today’s situation is a test of the institutions. When speaking about institutions, I mean theentire spectrum – from politics, the healthcare and educational sectors and the economy, topublic finances and banks. The healthier the institutions are, the stronger the response will be. Ifwe are unable to give an adequate institutional response, the effects could be disastrous.I will focus on what is happening in the banking sector in response to the crisis, and also from abroader strategic perspective.The banks entered the current crisis well-prepared thanks to what has been done in recentyears. I will only mention the unprecedented in their scale and depth asset quality review andstress tests conducted in the banks by the BNB and the European Central Bank. One of theirmain objectives was to get the banks prepared for the most adverse macroeconomic scenarioswhich many, at the time, considered to be impossible to materialise. Now that we are goingthrough these ‘impossible’ scenarios, we see that the banks are responding adequately and theycontinue to be in good shape.This good preparation helped us, at the very beginning of the crisis, to take additional measuresand reinforce the banks’ capital position and liquidity. Among the measures were the fullcapitalisation of all the profits in this sector, strong reduction in foreign exposures, and alsocancellation of the planned additional capital requirements associated with cyclical risks. Thispackage of measures ensured an additional resource of BGN 9.3 billion in the banking system.The package of measures has not been launched only and exclusively for banks. It has ratherbeen designed to ensure that banks are able to take steps and cushion the effects of the crisisfor businesses and households. The main tool that was used to this purpose and is still in placeis the so-called ‘private moratorium’ on loan payments. Up to now payments for over 14thousand businesses and over 93 thousand households, totalling more than BGN 9 billion, havebeen suspended , which really and considerably eases the financial conditions during the hardesttime of the crisis.The crisis has moved the external financing conditions issue to the top of the agenda. You knowthat the crisis triggered the accumulation of deficits which must be financed and the requiredfinancial buffers must be maintained. Therefore, we had to give an additional signal to marketsand investors that Bulgaria stays stable in the crisis in terms of its financial position and its 1 / 2BIS central bankers' speeches
monetary regime. This signal was given with the EUR 2 billion swap line set up between theEuropean Central Bank and the Bulgarian National Bank, and it has been read unequivocally as apositive one by markets, rating agencies, and investors alike. I want to point out one veryimportant thing – the conclusion about Bulgaria’s strong financial position remains valid now,despite the developments in the last months. A drastic change of this direction would be amistake with serious repercussions.All measures so far pursued in relation to the banking sector, which I believe were successfuland timely, do not, in any way, diminish our concern of what is happening and is going to happenin the coming months. There is great uncertainty as to the development of the health crisis, theeconomic crisis related to it, and to how the political situation will evolve.Therefore, as you may have seen from the data we recently published, the Bulgarian NationalBank remains conservative in its economic growth forecasts, and with a rather broad range ofassumptions, at that. We are presently working on a new, updated assessment of this year’ssituation and of our expectations for the next one. We will publish this assessment in October.We also carefully monitor the economic developments in the euro area, which will be of crucialsignificance, mainly regarding, but not limited to, external demand, for the way and the pace ofrecovery of our economy. We share the assessment of the European Central Bank,communicated just a few days ago. In short, this is as follows: there are clear signs of economicrecovery; however, the uncertainty with regard to the pandemic and the way it will be curbed isstill great. Depending on the developments, both in the country and in the euro area, we in theBulgarian National Bank are ready to launch additional measures, if needed.Out of the context of specific additional crisis-related measures, in the current year we alsoachieved development of enormous strategic importance, which will be ever more highly valuedin the future. What I have in mind is the simultaneous accession of the Bulgarian Lev to the EUexchange rate mechanism and the country to the European Banking Union. This is the first steptowards Bulgaria’s full integration into the euro area, i.e. to the core of the European Union, an actthe importance of which goes far beyond the banking and financial sector.In a matter of days, on 1 October, the Bulgarian National Bank, through its banking supervision,will become the first Bulgarian institution that is a full-fledged member of an important euro areainstitution – the Single Supervisory Mechanism. This, inter alia, is a notable example ofinstitutional development. Only a few years ago the supervision was one of the most vulnerableand most criticized regulatory institutions in the country. Now, it is one of the most sound andstrong institutions, unanimously welcomed to the family of EU banking supervision. This exampleof institutional development may also be applied in other important areas. This will allow us tocope not only with the challenges of the present but also of the future day.Please allow me to end on this note and to thank you sincerely for the privilege to be with you onthis day and to wish you a successful academic year. 2 / 2BIS central bankers' speeches
SPEECHUnequal scars – distributional consequences of the pandemicSpeech by Isabel Schnabel, Member of the Executive Board of the ECB, at the panel discussion “Verteilung der Lasten der Pandemie” (“Sharing the burden of the pandemic”), Deutscher Juristentag 2020Frankfurt am Main, 18 September 2020The coronavirus (COVD-19) pandemic is the most severe crisis in post-war history.[1]It threatens the health of the population, poses enormous challenges to the healthcare system and is causing significant economic costs. Within a short period of time, wide-ranging government support measures were introduced in an attempt to cushion some of the direct consequences of the crisis. In light of the enormous economic costs of the pandemic and the measures taken thus far, questions have been raised about how the economic burden of the crisis will be financed and distributed.The pandemic is a global shock that has hit all euro area countries almost simultaneously. Since then, however, it has become increasingly clear that the pandemic is having very different impacts on different countries. Those countries that already exhibited low growth and limited fiscal space before the crisis have been affected most severely. As a consequence, the pandemic threatens to exacerbate existing cross-country differences.However, differences are not only emerging between countries. Within countries, too, there are strong indications that pre-existing inequalities are being reinforced by the crisis. Lower-income individuals, those with lower levels of education as well as women and young people are affected the most.The common monetary policy of the European Central Bank (ECB) has limited means to counteract this type of divergence. Instead, it is the task of fiscal policy to implement targeted measures to prevent the resulting inequality from turning into a structural phenomenon.Threat of divergence at country levelSignificant cross-country differences can already be identified when considering the development of COVID-19 cases over time. The figures in Europe have been relatively benign by international standards, while North and South America, for instance, have reported considerably more dramatic increases in total infection numbers (Figure 1).Figure 1Total number of COVID-19 infections worldwide.Per million inhabitants
Source: Bloomberg. Note: Counts are subject to change as governments survey and confirm cases. Data are based on reported infection numbers as of midnight EST at each date. Sources also include Johns Hopkins University, World Health Organization, DXY, NHC, BNO News, China CDC, European CDC, US CDC, Italy Ministry of Health, Hong Kong Department of Health, Macau Government, Taiwan CDC, Government of Canada, Australia Government Department of Health, and Ministry of Health Singapore.Nevertheless, the situation within Europe is far from homogenous. In recent weeks, a particularly strong increase in active COVID-19 infections has been observed in Spain and France, while Germany and Italy have been recording low numbers, relative to the size of each country’s population (Figure 2).Figure 2Number of active COVID-19 infections in Europe.Per million inhabitantsSource: Bloomberg. Note: Active case numbers based on a 7-day moving average. Counts are subject to change as governments survey and confirm cases. Data are based on reported values as of midnight EST at each date. Based on population data as of 3 September 2020. Sources include Johns Hopkins University, World Health Organization, DXY, NHC, BNO News, European CDC, Italy Ministry of Health.
The economic fallout from the pandemic is severe. The lockdown measures imposed by governments led to a sharp decline in gross domestic product (GDP), causing the euro area economy to contract by 11.8% in the second quarter (Figure 3). While a strong recovery is expected in the third quarter, the most recent ECB staff projections estimate euro area GDP at end-2022 to be around 3% below the growth path that had been forecast as recently as March.[2]It may therefore take years to completely overcome the economic damage caused by the crisis.Figure 3Real Gross Domestic Product (GDP): euro area.Index: 2019Q4 = 100Source: ECB (Macroeconomic Projection Exercise, September 2020).Note: The grey area indicates the range of ECB staff projections that cover the different pandemic scenarios included in the Macroeconomic Projection Exercise.In this context, too, significant differences are observable across euro area countries. While the European Commission’s forecast estimates that Germany’s GDP will fall by 6.3% in 2020, the contraction in GDP for France, Italy and Spain is expected to exceed 10% (Figure 4). It is unlikely that the resumption of economic growth in 2021 will significantly reduce these differences. Risks of an increasing cross-country divergence in economic performance therefore continue to persist.Figure 4Annual growth rate of real GDP: Germany, France, Italy, Spain.Percent
Source: [TBU]In this context, the economic consequences of the pandemic depend significantly on the severity of lockdown measures that were imposed in the first few months of the pandemic in order to contain the spread of the virus. There is a clear negative correlation between the extent of government-imposed restrictions, measured by the Oxford Stringency Index, and the fall in GDP projected for 2020 (Figure 5). However, the severity of the lockdown measures cannot fully explain the divergence in economic performance, as exemplified by the comparison between the Netherlands and Greece.Figure 5Stringency of national crisis measures vs. projection of real GDP growth rate in 2020.Index, percent
Source: European Commission (Summer Economic Forecast, July 2020), University of Oxford. Note: The Oxford Stringency Index defines the stringency of national crisis measures between 0 (no restrictions) and 100 (maximum level of restrictions).Europe-wide travel restrictions and the drop in demand for travel abroad led to considerable economic losses in countries with a relatively high dependency on tourism, such as Greece or Spain. A correlation analysis shows that the projected drop in economic activity tends to be most pronounced in those countries (Figure 6).Figure 6Travel exports as a share of total services exports vs. projection of real GDP growth rate in 2020.Percent
Source: European Commission (Summer Economic Forecast, July 2020), Eurostat Balance of Payments.Owing to differences in sectoral composition, the share of the workforce employed in sectors that are particularly affected by the restrictions varies significantly across countries (Figure 7). These structural factors have further reinforced differences in the impact of the pandemic on different countries. In Spain and Italy, for example, the share of the workforce employed in sectors that are most affected by lockdown measures is particularly high, exceeding 30%.Figure 7Share of employees in lockdown sectors.PercentSource: EU Statistics on Income and Living Conditions (EU-SILC), 2018. Note: The chart shows the distribution of the share of employees in lockdown sectors across 6 largest euro area countries. Lockdown sectors are: wholesale and retail trade, repair of motor vehicles and motorcycles; transporting and 
storage; accommodation and food service activities; arts, entertainment and recreation (sectors G, H, I and R in the Statistical Classification of Economic Activities in the European Community (NACE) classification).Economic policy reaction: fiscal and monetary policy as complementsDespite the magnitude of the economic downturn, unemployment has only increased marginally so far (Figure 8). This partly results from a drop in labour market participation, given that some individuals currently do not actively seek employment due to social distancing rules or childcare duties.[3]Moreover, euro area countries have implemented large-scale job retention programmes, thus preventing lay-offs and unemployment. The German Kurzarbeitergeld (short-time work allowance) is an example of such a scheme. In the context of these government support programmes, significant heterogeneity across member countries is also apparent. Nevertheless, due to these measures, a considerable increase in unemployment was most likely averted in all countries.Figure 8Unemployment rate and share of workers in job retention schemes.PercentSource: Eurostat; Bundesagentur für Arbeit and ifo Institute Munich; Ministère du Travail, de L’Emploi et de L’Insertion; INPS; Ministerio de Inclusión, Seguridad Social y Migraciones, and ECB staff computations.Latest observation: July 2020 for the unemployment rate; July 2020 for the number of workers in ERTE in Spain; June 2020 for the number of workers in Kurzarbeit in Germany and Activité Partielle in France; May 2020 for the number of workers in Cassa Integrazione in Italy.In addition to job retention schemes, euro area countries have launched a large number of further fiscal measures to support households and companies in the wake of the pandemic. The resulting funding needs will lead to a considerable medium-term increase in public debt levels in all euro area countries (Figure 9).Figure 9Public debt in the euro area in 2019 vs. projection for 2021Percent of GDP
Source: European Commission (Spring Economic Forecast, May 2020).The impact of the pandemic has been particularly harsh in those countries that had already incurred a high level of public debt before the current crisis. A high level of public debt limits the scope for fiscal stimulus measures. In this context, a widely shared concern at the start of the crisis was that the fiscal response in these countries would be insufficient. Indeed, a negative correlation between the extent of the fiscal stimulus measures and the severity of the expected economic contraction was initially observed (Figure 10). It should also be highlighted that the stronger impact of the coronavirus crisis in these countries had not, or only to a limited extent, been caused by misguided government policies.Figure 10Projection of real GDP growth rate in 2020 and fiscal stimulus.Percent
Source: European Commission (Ameco).Note: Real GDP growth estimates are based on data published by the European Commission (Summer Economic Forecast, July 2020). Fiscal stimulus estimates are based on data published by the European Commission (Spring Economic Forecast, May 2020), the most recent harmonised projection. These estimates therefore do not include the latest announcements of fiscal support measures. Fiscal stimulus is calculated as the change in the primary deficit, adjusted for cyclical effects.Since the crisis hit Europe, concerns about increasing fragmentation in the euro area have also dominated financial market developments. In March, monetary policy was faced with a rapidly deteriorating market environment. Investors fled to the safest securities and asset classes. Risk premia in other market segments rose dramatically, liquidity dried up, and financing conditions worsened considerably. Companies were confronted with acute liquidity shortages as revenues plummeted abruptly. The composite indicator of systemic stress (CISS) used by the ECB suggests that the European financial sector was most likely facing an imminent and severe financial crisis, which was only averted by a decisive and swift policy response on the part of the ECB (Figure 11).Most notably, the measures comprised the provision of abundant liquidity to banks at extremely favourable conditions, as well as a temporary asset purchase programme tailored specifically to the pandemic crisis – the pandemic emergency purchase programme (PEPP). The design of the PEPP allows asset purchases to be distributed flexibly over time, across asset classes and among jurisdictions. The announcement of PEPP had an immediate and calming effect on financial markets.Figure 11Indicator for systemic stress in financial markets.Index
Source: ECB Working Paper No. 1426.Note: CISS denotes the Composite Indicator of Systemic Stress (0 = No stress,1 = High stress). The indicator aggregates stress signals from money, bond, equity and foreign exchange markets.Latest observation: 14 September 2020.In particular, the PEPP effectively countered risks of fragmentation in European financial markets, which would have prevented the smooth transmission of our monetary policy measures to the entire euro area. Risk premia in European government bond markets declined markedly and have reverted approximately to their pre-crisis levels (Figure 12). This had a direct impact on the funding costs for households and enterprises in the euro area, thereby cushioning the economic impact of the crisis.Figure 1210-year yield spreads of selected government bonds over German equivalents.Basis points
Source: Bloomberg.Latest observation: 16 September 2020.However, risk premia on government bonds did not decrease solely because of the monetary policy response. In addition, the agreement on a large-scale rescue package at European level contributed to a normalisation of risk premia. The fiscal support measures comprising loans and transfers were essential in reducing risk premia to their pre-crisis levels.The agreement on the rescue package was not merely a sign of European solidarity during the crisis. It was also recognition of the fact that a substantial divergence in economic performance would ultimately be detrimental to all European countries. As a consequence, the funds should primarily benefit those countries that were most affected by the crisis and only have limited fiscal space available.Unlike in the global financial crisis and the European sovereign debt crisis, a decisive European response was implemented quickly. Unlike back then, monetary and fiscal policy are today acting in a complementary manner and are reinforcing each other. This policy response made it possible to effectively counter what is undoubtedly the most severe economic crisis in living memory.Rising inequality as a result of the pandemicThe crisis has not only left scars of varying depth at the country level. The consequences of government-imposed lockdown measures can also be differentiated according to the socioeconomic characteristics of the affected individuals. Based on empirical data, a number of recent academic studies consider the social consequences of the pandemic at an individual level.The findings of these studies suggest that the lockdown measures had a particularly marked impact on sectors in which work under physical distancing rules was difficult or almost impossible. Data for the euro area show that the share of employees in the most affected sectors increases notably in income (Figure 13).Figure 13Share of employees in lockdown sectors by income quintiles.Percent
Source: EU Statistics on Income and Living Conditions (EU-SILC), 2018; Ireland and Slovakia 2017. Note: The chart shows the distribution of the share of employees in lockdown sectors across quintiles of the income distribution in the euro area.In a recent study, Mongey et al. (2020) use US data to show that employees in lockdown sectors typically have lower levels of education, lower incomes and lower savings than employees outside of the sectors directly affected by these measures.[4]Beland et al. (2020) obtain similar results.[5] Social distancing rules could thus contribute to an increase in income inequality.Chetty et al. (2020) find that particularly large job losses in the United States occurred in companies that operate in lockdown industries and offer personal services catering to high-income households.[6]To a large extent, these job losses affected low-income employees. This finding also suggests that government-imposed lockdown measures could increase inequality further.Indeed, Furceri et al. (2020) show that previous pandemics had the effect of amplifying income inequality.[7]These consequences of the crisis are relevant from a macroeconomic – and monetary policy – perspective because patterns of consumption and savings differ greatly across various income groups. Whereas individuals located at lower levels of the income distribution spend most of their income on basic necessities, the shares of savings and consumer spending that could be postponed during the crisis is particularly high at the top of the income distribution (Figure 14). An increase in inequality therefore has an impact on the effectiveness of fiscal and monetary policy measures.[8]Figure 14Categories of spending and savings by income quintiles.Percent
Source: Household Budget Survey. Note: The chart shows the structure of household expenditures (spending) and saving across income quintiles. Blue bars denote necessities, items unaffected by lockdown, such as food at home, housing and utilities, health items, communications and education. Yellow bars denote items restricted by the lockdown, such as food in restaurants, transport services, holidays, hotels and cultural services. Red bars denote postponable spending items, such as purchases of motor vehicles, clothing and footwear, and furnishings and furniture. Green bars show household saving. The chart shows an aggregate of Germany, Spain and France.Furthermore, the impact of the lockdown measures is also associated with individuals’ education level. In the Netherlands, for example, sectors with a higher share of work hours spent in home office during the crisis tend to have a higher proportion of employees with tertiary education (Figure 15). Employees in these sectors are presumably less affected by short-time work schemes and income shortfalls, given that they were able to continue working from home during the pandemic period.Figure 15Share of workers with tertiary education vs. share of working hours in home office.Percent
Source: von Gaudecker et al. (2020), Longitudinal Internet Studies for the Social Sciences (LISS), CentERdata/Tilburg University. Note: Data refer to survey results obtained in the Netherlands between 20 March and 31 March 2020. Response rate: 80% (5,544 individuals).The lockdown measures could also lead to a worsening of inequality for individuals who are still in school. For example, during the period of home schooling in the wake of the pandemic, students from US districts with higher average household incomes earned a higher number of badges for completing online courses relative to those from districts with lower incomes (Figure 16). The observed dispersion of learning outcomes is primarily problematic because it could lead to lasting differences in human capital accumulation, thus causing inequality to increase in the long run.Figure 16Students’ performance by estimated household income in the United States.IndexSource: Zearn, Inc., Opportunity Insights. Note: Average number of students using Zearn math teaching program (in a week) relative to January 6-February 7, 2020. The lines show ZIP codes in bottom 25% of income [low], 25%-75% [middle] and above 75% [high]. A similar chart was published by The Economist on 27 July 2020.Finally, recent studies also indicate that the effects of lockdown measures can also be differentiated in terms of individuals’ age and gender.On the one hand, the share of young employees in sectors that have been particularly affected by the government-imposed containment measures is relatively high. On the other hand, women across almost all age groups are more heavily affected by the restrictions than men (Figure 17).[9]Figure 17Share of employees in lockdown sectors by age and gender.Percent
Source: EU Statistics on Income and Living Conditions (EU-SILC), 2018; Ireland and Slovakia 2017. Note: The chart shows the distribution of the share of employees in lockdown sectors across age and gender.The crisis could also have an impact on the labour market participation of women. In a recent macroeconomic model that was calibrated on the basis of US data, Alon et al. (2020) show that during pandemics the ratio of labour hours supplied by women relative to men falls much more sharply than in “normal” recessions (Figure 18). The persistence of temporary financial losses on the labour market[10]could structurally entrench such gender differences.[11]Figure 18Share of employees in lockdown sectors by age and gender.Ratio of labour hours supplied by women vs. men, quarters since start of recession
Source: Alon, Doepke, Olmstead-Rumsey and Tertilt (2020). Note: Chart is based on Figure 4 in the latest available paper draft (August 2020).The closure of childcare facilities and schools was a key element of the lockdown measures that were implemented in many countries. A renewed surge in infection numbers could result in such measures being reintroduced. Fuchs-Schündeln et al. (2020) estimate that, in Germany, up to 11% of employees could be forced to stop working and stay at home instead in case school closures are extended.[12]Adams et al. (2020) present survey data indicating that childcare duties imposed a much larger burden on women during the coronavirus crisis.[13]Alon et al. (2020) conclude that women in particular will have to cope with substantial financial losses as a result of the additional burden due to childcare duties.[14]It is likely that single mothers with low incomes are particularly affected by such losses.Collectively, the available evidence is consistent in concluding that government-imposed lockdown measures primarily affect people in lower income brackets, younger employees and women, especially those with children childcare duties. The containment measures are thus at least temporarily contributing to a reinforcement of existing social inequalities.Closing remarksI would now like to conclude my remarks.The COVID-19 pandemic has affected different parts of our society in different ways. The heterogeneous evolution of case numbers resulted in lockdown measures of varying stringency, which were in part contingent on the sectoral composition of individual countries. As a result, the economic impact of the containment measures was more severe in some countries than in others. The decisive measures taken by fiscal policy makers at national and European level as well as the ECB’s monetary policy will help to mitigate a looming economic divergence between individual European countries.It will be essential to find a common European response to these shared challenges, and to implement it on the basis of the ground-breaking decisions taken at the EU summit in July. The funds available under the Next Generation EU instrument should be used to strengthen the growth potential of all countries in a sustainable manner. In this context, measures to foster the transition of the economy to green and digital technologies should play a central role. At the same time, such measures can permanently reduce differences among individual euro area countries.
This is also beneficial for monetary policy. A lower degree of divergence in economic developments within the euro area increases the effectiveness of monetary policy measures.Completing the architecture of the euro area would also facilitate the implementation of adequate European responses to common crises in the future. In a survey commissioned by the European Parliament, 69% of respondents indicate that they would support additional competences for European authorities in responding to a crisis like the coronavirus pandemic.[15]Within countries, the impact of the crisis was by no means uniform either. In this context, disadvantaged individuals – including those with low incomes and education levels, younger workers and women – were far more heavily affected by the containment measures than others.However, an increase in inequality as a result of the crisis is not inevitable. Fiscal policy is able to provide targeted support to specific industries and social groups who bear a particularly heavy burden due to the pandemic. Such support is not only about redistribution, but also about empowerment of individuals to cope with the inevitable structural change caused by the pandemic. Education and family policy are likely to play an important role in this context.Within the remit of its mandate, monetary policy can have an impact on social inequality to the extent that its measures benefit lower income groups, given that these groups are most heavily affected by job losses. Beyond this effect, monetary policy does not possess targeted instruments to mitigate the distributional ramifications of the crisis on an individual level.In the long run, the key objective should be to prevent permanent scarring effects due to a structural entrenchment of inequalities emerging in the context of the crisis.Thank you very much for your attention.[1]This is a translated version of the original speech (delivered in German). I would like to thank Jirka Slacalek and Joachim Schroth for their contributions to this speech.[2]The ECB’s Macroeconomic Projection Exercise published in September 2020 is available at: https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/projections/html/ecb.projections202009_ecbstaff~0940bca288.en.html. The Broad Macroeconomic Projection Exercise published in March 2020 is available at: https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/ecb.projections202003_ecbstaff~dfa19e18c4.en.pdf.[3]See also Eurostat, News release 88/2020, 3 June 2020, https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/documents/2995521/10294960/3-03062020-AP-EN.pdf/b823ec2b-91af-9b2a-a61c-0d19e30138ef; Bundesagentur für Arbeit (Federal Employment Agency), Monatsbericht zum Arbeits- und Ausbildungsmarkt, August 2020, https://www.arbeitsagentur.de/datei/arbeitsmarktbericht-august-2020_ba146633.pdf.[4]Mongey, S., Pilossoph, L. and Weinberg, A. (2020), “Which workers bear the burden of social distancing policies?”, Covid Economics, Issue 12, pp. 69-86.[5]Beland, L.-P., Brodeur, A. and Wright, T. (2020), “COVID-19, Stay-At-Home Orders and Employment: Evidence from CPS Data”, IZA Discussion Paper Series, Discussion Paper No 13282, May.[6]Chetty, R., Friedman, J.N., Hendren, N., Stepner, M. and Opportunities Insight Team (2020), “Real-Time Economics: A New Public Platform to Analyze the Impacts of COVID-19 and Macroeconomic Policies Using Private Sector Data”, September, available at: https://opportunityinsights.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/tracker_paper.pdf.[7]Furceri, D., Loungani, P., Ostry, J.D. and Pizzuto, P. (2020), “Will COVID-19 affect inequality? Evidence from past pandemics”, Covid Economics, Issue 12, pp. 138-157.[8]Brinca, P., Holter, H. A., Krusell, P. und Malafry, L. “Fiscal multipliers in the 21st century”, Journal of Monetary Economics, Band 77, S. 53–69; Gross, T., Notowidigdo, M. J. und Wang, J., “The Marginal Propensity to Consume over the Business Cycle”, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, Band 12, Ausgabe 2, S. 351–384; Voinea, L., Lovin, H. und Cojocaru, A. (2018), “The impact of inequality on the transmission of monetary policy”, Journal of International Money and Finance, Band 85, S. 236–250.[9]See also: Torrejón Pérez, S., Fana, M., González-Vázquez, I. and Fernández-Macías, E. (2020), “The asymmetric impact of COVID-19 confinement measures on EU labour markets”, VoxEU, 9 May.[10]On the persistence of income losses on the labour market, see also: Stevens, A.H. (1997), “Persistent effects of job displacement: The importance of multiple job losses”, Journal of Labour Economics, 15 (1), pp. 165-188.[11]Alon et al. (2020), by contrast, assume that the negative effects in the short term can be offset by men becoming more heavily involved in childcare in the long term.[12]Fuchs-Schündeln, N., Kuhn, M. and Tertilt, M. (2020), “The short-run macro implications of school and childcare closures”, VoxEU, 3 May.[13]Adams, A., Boneva, T., Golin, M. and Rauh, C. (2020), “Inequality in the impact of the Coronavirus shock: evidence from real-time surveys”, CEPR Discussion Paper 14665, Centre for Economic Policy Research, April.
18 September 2020Slides [14]Alon, T.M., Doepke, M., Olmstead-Rumsey, J. and Tertilt, M. (2020), “The impact of COVID-19 on gender equality”, NBER Working Paper Series, Working Paper No 26947, National Bureau of Economic Research, April.[15]https://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/press-room/20200525IPR79717/eu-citizens-want-more-competences-for-the-eu-to-deal-with-crises-like-covid-19.CoronavirusPandemic emergency purchase programme (PEPP)Monetary policyDisclaimerPlease note that related topic tags are currently available for selected content only.European Central BankDirectorate General Communications Sonnemannstrasse 20, 60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany Tel.: +49 69 1344 7455, email: media@ecb.europa.euWebsite: www.ecb.europa.euReproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.Media contactsRelated topicsCopyright 2020, European Central Bank 
I would like to thank Patrick Sabourin and Rolande Kpekou Tossou for their help in preparing this speech.  Not for publication before August 25, 2020 1:30 pm Eastern Time      Remarks by Lawrence Schembri Deputy Governor, Bank of Canada Canadian Association for Business Economics August 25, 2020 Delivered via webcast  Perceived inflation and reality: understanding the difference “All our knowledge has its origins in our perceptions.” —Leonardo da Vinci  Introduction Good afternoon. It is a pleasure to once again have this opportunity to speak at CABE’s annual late-summer conference, although the circumstances have changed radically since I last spoke a few years ago. The COVID-19 pandemic has disrupted all our lives and imposed much hardship on many. When I was last with you, we were on the top floor of a Kingston hotel overlooking Lake Ontario. I felt tested to hold your attention given the lovely view. Today, I’m similarly challenged, but by a virtual platform, made necessary by the serious health threat posed by the virus. The topic I’ll be addressing is inflation. It is a subject that central bankers never tire of talking about, since low and stable inflation is the core objective of the Bank of Canada’s monetary policy mandate.  I would like to offer a slightly different perspective to engage your interest—namely, the difference between how people perceive inflation versus the actual measured rate. This issue is important because individuals’ perceptions of inflation today—and their expectations of it for the future—influence their spending and saving behaviour, and thus affect overall macroeconomic outcomes. Moreover, inflation expectations have significant implications for the credibility of our 2 percent inflation target and for the effectiveness of monetary policy.      I would like to explore with you the observation that consumers, on average, think inflation is higher than what is measured and reported by statistical agencies. 
 - 2 - This gap has been regularly observed in Canada as well as in other jurisdictions, such as the United States and the United Kingdom.1  Recent public outreach conducted by the Bank has provided further evidence of this gap. As part of the process leading up to the renewal of our inflation-control target agreement with the federal government in 2021, we have sought out and are listening to the views of the public and other key stakeholders. One of the messages we have heard is that many people feel that the official consumer price index (CPI) inflation rate does not reflect the higher inflation they believe they are facing.  This gap between perception and measurement has been more pronounced during the pandemic. In the most recent Canadian Survey of Consumer Expectations (CSCE) conducted this past May, respondents indicated that they expected inflation to increase in the short term. In fact, the CPI inflation rate declined sharply over this period and has been below our 1 to 3 percent inflation-control range.2 To examine possible explanations for this gap, the Bank has been conducting joint research with Statistics Canada. In this speech, I will share with you some of the preliminary results before we publish our official findings this fall. And so today, I would like to do three things: • first, illustrate and characterize this gap; • second, explore some measurement and behavioural explanations of this disconnect between perception and reality; and  • third, examine the implications for monetary policy, including communications to different audiences.  Low and stable inflation promotes economic prosperity Economists define inflation as a sustained increase in the general price level of goods and services in an economy over a period of time. While this concept of inflation seems straightforward, measuring inflation accurately is difficult.  The CPI inflation rate is designed to track how much the average Canadian household spends and how that changes over time. To this end, Statistics Canada uses its Survey of Household Spending to estimate the shopping basket                                             1 See, for example, S. Axelrod, D. Lebow and E. Peneva, “Perceptions and Expectations of Inflation by U.S. Households,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Finance and Economics Discussion Series No. 2018-073 (October 2018) and S. Tenreyro, “Understanding Inflation: Expectations and Reality” (speech given at the Ronald Tress Memorial Lecture, Birkbeck University of London, London, England, July 10, 2019).  2 One explanation for the higher perceived inflation during the pandemic containment period is that households shifted their spending toward items that experienced higher price increases (e.g., food) and away from items that saw lower price increases or declining prices (e.g., gasoline). See Bank of Canada, “Box 2: Adjusted CPI inflation shows only slightly less decline than CPI inflation,” Monetary Policy Report (July 2020): 18. Another explanation is that price increases have an outsized impact on household perceptions of inflation.     
 - 3 - of a representative household. This basket consists of about 700 goods and services that Canadians typically buy, each with their own weight.3  Measuring CPI inflation is also very important for us at the Bank. We firmly believe that keeping inflation low, stable and predictable is the best contribution monetary policy can make to promoting the economic and financial well-being of Canadians.  Our inflation target of 2 percent is defined in terms of the annual CPI inflation rate. This widely reported rate holds us to account because our performance can be easily assessed against it.  The Bank has had a good track record of achieving our target. Inflation has averaged close to 2 percent since we established this specific target in 1993, and it has been very stable since.4  But it’s more than just a number. Achieving our target on a continuing basis contributes to rising standards of living for all Canadians. When people and businesses feel confident that they know what the rate of inflation will be, they can make better long-range plans for their careers, their savings and their investments.  Moreover, when low inflation is well maintained, price signals are more meaningful. Markets and the overall economy function better. And this leads to stronger and more stable employment and output growth. Our success in achieving our 2 percent target, however, depends on many factors—and one of the most important is the public’s inflation expectations. Having a policy target that is well understood and trusted by Canadians helps keep inflation on target.   Inflation perceptions and expectations Let’s turn our attention now to the main issue I would like to address today: the discrepancy between the measured rate of inflation and what some individuals perceive inflation to be. As I mentioned earlier, the average consumer tends to think they are facing higher inflation than both measured inflation and our target. We know this because we began to collect the views of Canadian households about inflation in 2014 through the CSCE I mentioned earlier. This survey asks individuals what they think the inflation rate is now and what they expect it to be in the future.  Let’s look at some observations from the most recent CSCE (Chart 1), which are typical of past surveys.                                              3 Each item in the basket is given a weight that depends on how much a typical household spends on that item. The weights in the CPI basket are currently fixed for two years. This approach helps to obtain a consistent measure of pure price change.   4 Since 1993, the CPI inflation rate has been within our 1 to 3 percent target range about 80 percent of the time.  
 - 4 - First, we see that consumers’ perceived inflation rate today is generally above the actual CPI inflation rate, but reasonably close to our 2 percent target.5  Second, there is a correlation between current perceptions and future expectations of inflation at both the one- and five-year horizons. For example, if consumers think prices have notably increased in the last 12 months, then there is a good chance they will expect inflation to stay high in the future.  Finally, the difference between expected inflation and current inflation (as well as relative to our target) increases as the horizon is extended from one year to five years.6   As an aside, it is noteworthy that a comparison of the CSCE with a similar survey published by the New York Federal Reserve Bank finds the perception gap is smaller and less dispersed in Canada than in the United States (Chart 2a and Chart 2b). This difference may reflect the impact of different communication strategies by the Bank of Canada and the US Federal Reserve.7                                               5 It is important to note that this gap is observed, on average, across Canadian households. The gap is larger for some groups—for example, younger households. 6 The higher expected inflation rate at the five-year horizon might reflect increased uncertainty about inflation outcomes, as suggested by relatively lower response rates. We also observe a greater degree of dispersion among respondents at this horizon.   7 Bellemare et al. (2019) conjecture that the narrower gap in Canada might be related to the Bank’s success with and focused communications on the 2 percent inflation target, creating a focal point for perceptions and expectations at 2 percent. In Bellemare, Kpekou Tossou and Moran, “The Determinants of Consumer's Inflation Expectations: Evidence from the US and Canada,” (unpublished manuscript, Department of Economics, Université Laval, July 1st, 2020), LaTex.  0123452014Q42015Q42016Q42017Q42018Q42019Q4%Bank of Canada inflation-control targetActual CPICurrent perceptions of inflationOne-year-ahead inflation expectationsFive-year-ahead inflation expectationsChart 1: Households perceive inflation to be higher than official measuresLast observation: 2020Q2Sources: Statistics Canada and Bank of Canada 
 - 5 -     Interestingly, Canadian firms and financial market participants expect inflation to be closer to the 2 percent target (and to actual measured CPI) than Canadian consumers do (Chart 3). They have a stronger incentive to obtain a more accurate outlook because they set prices and wages and take positions based on what they expect inflation to be. -10123452013Q32014Q32015Q32016Q32017Q32018Q3%Canada one-year-ahead inflation expectationsCanada inflation realization, one year laterUnited States one-year-ahead inflation expectationsUnited States inflation realization, one year laterChart 2a: Inflation forecast errors are larger in the UnitedStates than in CanadaLast observations: inflation expectations, 2019Q2; inflation realization, 2020Q2Sources: Statistics Canada, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Survey of Consumer Expectations, US Bureau of Labor Statistics, and Bank of Canada 010203040Below -3(-3,0](0,1](1,2](2,3](3,4](4,5](5,6]Above 6%CanadaUnited StatesChart 2b: Inflation expectations in the United States are more skewed to the upsideDistribution of one-year-ahead inflation expectations, United States versus CanadaLast observations: Canada, 2020Q2; United States, October 2019 Sources: Federal Reserve Bank of New York Survey of Consumer Expectationsand Bank of Canada
 - 6 -  It is also possible that consumers no longer see the benefit of closely monitoring inflation. Such behaviour, known as “rational inattention,” likely reflects the economic environment in Canada, where inflation has been low and stable over the last 25 years.8 All this being said, the gap between Canadians’ expectations of inflation—and this includes those of consumers, firms and market participants—and our inflation target has been relatively small. These well-anchored expectations have supported our ability to achieve the 2 percent target.  Nonetheless, as a central bank, we don’t take for granted that inflation expectations are anchored at the target. The credibility of our target is of paramount importance. Consequently, it’s valuable to gain insights into why some households have a perception gap. Explaining the gap between perceived and measured inflation Measurement issue 1: representativeness of the CPI consumption basket One explanation for this gap is that consumers may not feel that the CPI consumption basket represents the goods and services they consume. In other words, they may feel that their consumption basket is different from the average. Or they may think their own purchases have risen in price by more than those in the CPI basket. In particular, the CSCE found that certain groups of consumers perceive an inflation rate materially higher than what Statistics Canada reports.                                             8 For more information, see C. A. Sims, “Chapter 4: Rational Inattention and Monetary Economics,” Handbook of Monetary Economics 3 (2010): 155–181.   12342014Q42015Q42016Q42017Q42018Q42019Q4%Bank of Canada inflation-control targetFirms' two-year-ahead inflation expectationsProfessional forecasters' two-year-ahead inflation expectationsHouseholds' two-year-ahead inflation expectationsChart 3: Inflation expectations of firms and professional forecasters havebeen closer to target than those of consumersLast observation: 2020Q2Note: Firms' expectations are from the Bank of Canada Business Outlook Survey, a quarterly survey that interviews business leaders from about 100 firms to gather a broad range of economic perspectives. The professional forecasts are from Consensus Economics, whichgathers macroeconomic forecasts that are provided by leading economists.Sources: Bank of CanadaandConsensus Economics
 - 7 - In our joint research with Statistics Canada, we explored this discrepancy by constructing the consumption basket and inflation rate for different groupings of households, based on income, education, age and renters versus owners. Our general finding is that the inflation rates constructed for specific consumer groupings are similar to the measured CPI inflation rate.9 Simply put, the perceptions of these groups were not consistent with our results.  To illustrate this point, let’s take age as an example. We constructed different CPI baskets for young, middle-aged and senior households and calculated inflation rates for each group (Chart 4).  The results show that, regardless of the different composition of their baskets, each age group’s average inflation rate tracked very closely to actual, measured CPI.10   Taking this analysis further, let’s go back to the perceptions reported in the CSCE for each age group. Chart 5 clearly shows that younger consumers have much higher and more volatile inflation expectations than the two other age groups, and certainly higher than the measured rate.                                             9 While this finding generally holds, low income households and renters have experienced a modestly lower rate of inflation compared with the average Canadian household over the last five years (on average about 0.2 percentage points). The lower inflation rate for these groups can be explained by the fact that they spend a larger share of their basket on rent but a smaller portion on child care and housekeeping services, and the price of rent has been growing by less than that of child care and housekeeping services. This effect has been offset somewhat by their larger share spent on food, which has experienced higher rates of price increases. Despite the lower measured inflation rate for these groups, their perceived inflation rates are somewhat higher than the CPI inflation rate. This difference may reflect behavioural factors. 10 Statistics Canada compiled a Consumer Price Index for Seniors (CPI-S) from January 2013 to August 2018 and obtained a similar result. For more details, see C. Michaud, “Development of a Consumer Price Index for Seniors,” Statistics Canada Prices Analytical Series (June 20, 2019).  012342015Q12016Q12017Q12018Q12019Q12020Q1%Household-level inflation, ages 18–30Household-level inflation, ages 31–54Household-level inflation, ages 55+Household-level inflation, all agesChart 4: Household-levelinflation by age group is very similar Year-over-year percentage changeLast observation: 2020Q1Source: Statistics Canada 
 - 8 -  Measurement issue 2: quality adjustment Moving to the second measurement issue, let’s talk about the principle of quality adjustment. To accurately measure price movements, the CPI should have goods and services in its basket that are of comparable quality over time. However, we know from our own experience that the quality of certain products—like electronics and cars—is constantly improving. Thus, measured price increases should be adjusted for quality changes.  However, in practice, consumers see prices rising but they don’t consider that the quality has also improved. They see a larger price tag on things like cell phones, laptops and cars, but they don’t consider the new features that have been added.  These types of goods represent about one-sixth of the CPI basket, as shown in Chart 6.  12342014Q42015Q42016Q42017Q42018Q42019Q4%Current perceptions of inflation, ages 18–30Current perceptions of inflation, ages 31–54Current perceptions of inflation, ages 55+Chart 5: Youth have higher and more volatile perceptions of inflationLast observation: 2020Q2Source: Bank of Canada
 - 9 -  *Subject to positive or negative quality adjustments (others include furniture and rent) † Subject to adjustments mostly for changes in size, weight or unit (others include hygienic, medicinal and pharmaceutical products) ‡ No quality adjustments (others include water, fuel oil, public transportation, insurance, books, and many recreational services) § Subject to regular positive quality adjustments (others include audio and video equipment and telecom services) Sources: Statistics Canada and Bank of Canada  Last observation: 2020Q2 For these goods, Statistics Canada applies quality adjustment techniques, including hedonic pricing,11 that take into account price changes resulting from new features and quality improvements.12 Such adjustments have removed about 0.2 percentage points from the CPI inflation rate, on average, in recent years. Measurement issue 3: the price of housing versus the price of houses The third and final measurement issue I’d like you to consider is that consumers’ perception of inflation is likely influenced by the price of houses.13 This is                                             11 For more details, see Statistics Canada, “The Canadian Consumer Price Index Reference Paper,” Catalogue no. 62-553-X (February 27, 2019). 12 Statistics Canada’s quality adjustments to the prices of various goods and services are estimates; thus, there is a risk that the overall impact of quality adjustment may be too small or too large. In the past, the prevailing view was that measures of inflation were biased upward because of a lack of quality adjustment, including for the introduction of new goods. Sabourin shows, however, that significant improvements have greatly reduced this bias in recent years, in P. Sabourin, “Measurement Bias in the Canadian Consumer Price Index: An Update,” Bank of Canada Review (summer 2012): 1–11.  13 There is a significant positive correlation between house price growth, as measured by the Teranet–National Bank House Price Index, and CSCE respondents’ inflation perceptions and expectations.   Gasoline 3%Electricity and others28%Food, alcohol, beverages, tobacco products and others22%Cell phones and others 5%Cars and appliances11%Clothing and others31%Gasoline‡Electricity and others‡Food, alcohol, beverages, tobacco products and others†Cell phones and others§Cars and appliances§Clothing and others*Chart 6: About one-sixth of the CPI basket is subject to regular positive quality adjustments
 - 10 - particularly relevant in recent years, when we’ve seen rapid increases in house prices in markets like Toronto and Vancouver. This effect is understandable, since most Canadian households purchase a residence at some point in their lifetime. The crucial point is that the CPI inflation basket includes the price of housing—in other words, the price of the services that a house provides—not the price of a house. Statistics Canada estimates the price of housing services by adding up the costs associated with home ownership: namely, mortgage interest, insurance, property taxes, depreciation and maintenance and repairs.14  Over the last two decades, the price of houses has risen on average more than twice as fast as the price of housing, at a rate of 6 percent versus 2.5 percent (Chart 7).   The treatment of housing in inflation measurement is challenging, and it’s a topic of much debate.15 In recent years, Statistics Canada has been working diligently                                             14 Depreciation refers to the costs to maintain the structure and foundation of a house, while maintenance and repair costs are associated with the appearance of the house. The price of housing services can be estimated through either a user-cost approach, which is the one taken by Statistics Canada, or a rental-equivalence approach, with the latter seeking to capture the value of the services consumed. For further information on the different approaches to measuring the price of housing, see P. Sabourin and P. Duguay, “Measuring Durable Goods and Housing Prices in the CPI: An Empirical Assessment,” Bank of Canada Review (autumn 2015): 24–38.  15 Some jurisdictions exclude the price of housing entirely from their official measure of inflation. Some observers have gone to other extremes and have argued that the price of houses should be included in the CPI basket. The latter approach is difficult to justify theoretically, because houses are assets and serve as a store of wealth. It is the services that the house provides that are consumed.  -10-50510152001Q12004Q12007Q12010Q12013Q12016Q12019Q1%Price of housingPrice of housesChart 7: Theprice of houses has been growing much faster than the price of housingYear-over-year percentage changeLast observation: 2020Q2Note: The price of houses is measured using the Teranet–National Bank House Price Index, while the price of housing is based on CPI.Sources: Teranet–National Bank House Price Index, Statistics Canada and Bank of Canada
 - 11 - to improve the measurement of the price of housing services, and further enhancements are planned.  Behavioural explanations While these three measurement issues offer plausible explanations of why consumers’ perceptions of inflation may be higher than measured rates, there are other explanations that are less tangible. The behaviour of consumers—which is determined by psychology as well as knowledge—has been found to have a significant impact on inflation perceptions and expectations. In terms of behaviour, our recent research shows that consumers’ perceived inflation rate tends to be influenced more by rising prices. The perception gap narrows when sharply declining prices are excluded (Chart 8).16     The reason behind this is simple: in forming their perceptions of inflation, consumers seem to put more weight on prices that go up rather than down. The loss of purchasing power from rising prices has been found to have an outsized psychological impact.17                                              16 To illustrate this effect in Chart 8, we have modified one of our core inflation measures, CPI-trim, to exclude 20 percent of the weighted monthly price variations at the bottom tail of the distribution but to keep 20 percent at the top of the distribution of price changes.  17 For a review of this loss aversion effect, see L. Vogel, J.-O. Menz and U. Fritsche, “Prospect Theory and Inflation Perceptions—An Empirical Assessment,” DEP (Socioeconomics) Discussion Papers—Macroeconomics and Finance Series, No. 3/2009 (July 2009); H. Afrouzi and L. Veldkamp, “Biased Inflation Forecasts,” Society for Economic Dynamics 2019 Meeting Papers No. 894 (2019); and O. Coibion and  01232014Q42015Q42016Q42017Q42018Q42019Q4%Current perceptions of inflationCPI inflation when sharply declining prices are excludedActual CPI inflationChart 8: Inflation perceptions are strongly influenced by price increasesLast observation: 2020Q2Sources: Statistics Canada and Bank of Canada 
 - 12 - Studies in other countries have found evidence of another behavioural explanation: namely, that consumers’ inflation perceptions are more strongly influenced by the prices of goods they purchase frequently—like food and gasoline.18 However, our recent research does not find a significant positive relationship between the price movements of frequently purchased goods and perceived inflation in Canada (Chart 9).19     Another factor that could affect the inflation perceptions gap of some consumers is their understanding of inflation and the economic factors that influence it. Improving their financial literacy could enhance their knowledge and serve to reduce the observed gaps. Central banks—including the Bank of Canada—are making a meaningful contribution to strengthening financial literacy through communication and outreach efforts.20                                              Y. Gorodnichenko, “Is the Phillips Curve Alive and Well After All? Inflation Expectations and the Missing Disinflation,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7, no. 1: 197–232.  18 For Canada, see A. Chaffe, “Consumer Price Inflation by Frequency of Purchase,” Statistics Canada Analytical Paper Catalogue No. 11-621-M no. 84 (2010); for the United States, see F. D’Acunto, U. Malmendier, J. Ospina and M. Weber, “Exposure to Daily Price Changes and Inflation Expectations,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 26237 (September 2019). 19 The price index of frequently purchased goods is constructed by using goods and services that consumers generally purchase on a monthly basis or more frequently (e.g., food, alcohol, tobacco products, utilities and personal care items). Note that the lack of significant correlation of the prices of frequently purchased goods and perceived inflation is found at the aggregate level. 20 At the federal level in Canada, the Financial Consumer Agency of Canada has primary responsibility for promoting financial education. Provincial governments have also taken steps in recent years to include financial literacy in their high school curricula, often in collaboration with the Canadian Foundation for Economic Education. 012342014Q42015Q42016Q42017Q42018Q42019Q4%Current perceptions of inflationCPI, frequent purchasesCPI, non-frequent purchasesChart 9: Inflation perceptions not influenced by frequent purchases Last observation: 2019Q4Sources: Statistics Canada and Bank of Canada 
 - 13 - So to recap, we’ve established that consumers’ inflation perceptions are generally higher than what is actually measured. We’ve looked at measurement issues that could explain this. And we’ve also considered some ways that consumers’ behaviour and understanding can shape the way they perceive inflation. The next logical questions would be: What is the role of a central bank in guiding consumers’ expectations towards our 2 percent inflation target? And why is this important? Inflation expectations and the conduct of monetary policy Let’s tackle the last question first. To do so, I think it’s relevant to look at the existing inflation-control agreement between the Bank and the Government of Canada. The agreement states that: “The well-established credibility of this framework has reinforced the Canadian public’s confidence that monetary policy will continue to achieve the inflation target, and helped underpin the Canadian economy through challenging times.” The key words here are “public’s confidence.” Because inflation expectations are a key determinant of economic behaviour and outcomes,21 it is important that consumers understand the Bank’s commitment to its inflation target. The more confidence that Canadians have in this commitment, the more they will anchor their beliefs and behaviours to this 2 percent target. Put another way, people will shrug off temporary movements in inflation if they believe inflation will remain on target in the long run. Their confidence that inflation will remain close to 2 percent helps keep inflation at that rate by allowing the economy to stabilize after short-term bumps.  As a result of this confidence, the Bank has the flexibility to see through temporary movements in inflation. We can keep a “steady hand” on the conduct of monetary policy, with the goal of keeping inflation sustainably on target.  However, in the context of a large and persistent shock, such as the start of the COVID-19 pandemic earlier this year, having a credible inflation target is even more important. With inflation expectations well anchored, the Bank was able to effectively respond in March to this unprecedented adverse shock.  One of the actions we took was to reduce our policy interest rates by 150 basis points over three announcements. Because inflation expectations were well                                             21 Recent evidence indicates that public expectations of future inflation have become the primary driver of inflation—not economic slack, reflecting, in part, the success of inflation targeting. This has been found for a number of countries that practice inflation targeting and is known as “flattening” the Phillips curve. For example, for the United States, see O. Jordà, C. Marti, F. Nechio and E. Tallman, “Inflation: Stress-testing the Phillips Curve,” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Letter No. 2019-05 (February 2019);  for Canada, refer to J. Kronick and F. Omran, “Inflation After the Crisis: What’s the Story?” CD Howe Institute Essential Policy Intelligence E-Brief (July 9, 2019).          
 - 14 - anchored at 2 percent, this translated into a decline in the real interest rate of roughly the same amount. This decline supported consumption and investment spending by households and firms, and helped promote demand through other channels, including the exchange rate. In contrast, if inflation expectations had not been well anchored, the reduction in our policy interest rate would have had less impact. Consequently, more monetary stimulus would have been necessary. Now, what about the role of communications in anchoring expectations?  We’ve established that inflation expectations affect macroeconomic outcomes and the conduct of monetary policy. Policy success in achieving the target and informative and accessible communications can, in turn, also influence expectations.  To be effective in influencing expectations, the Bank should: communicate often, communicate clearly and communicate consistently—all to a wide variety of audiences that include consumers, firms and market participants.   The Bank has embedded this concept in our strategic planning. We are committed to knowing our audiences, their interests and how best to reach them. Indeed, our research finds that when we provide households with practical information about our inflation target, they tend to shift their views toward actual inflation.22 In addition, we use other communication channels, including engaging in public outreach, offering accessible explanatory articles on our website, 23 and conducting education programs for students at all levels. All these initiatives help us connect with the public to explain the work we do and to underscore why it is important to them and to their families. We will also continue to consult on our inflation-target renewal process. To this end, we just launched an online public consultation called “Let’s Talk Inflation.” We are inviting Canadians to tell us what they think about inflation, our inflation-targeting framework and potential alternative monetary policy frameworks. Conclusion Let me conclude. Low and stable inflation is the core objective of our monetary policy. Achieving our inflation target depends critically on the credibility of the target and the anchoring of the public’s perceptions and expectations of inflation. Acknowledging and better understanding any gap between perceived and measured inflation is, therefore, very important. Public confidence in the target depends on measuring inflation accurately. Our research with Statistics Canada                                             22 For example, forward-looking information, such as the inflation projection in the Monetary Policy Report, has been found to have a strong impact. For more details, see the forthcoming Bank of Canada staff working paper by O. Kostyshyna and L. Petersen, “Communicating Central Bank Statistics and Uncertainty: A Randomized Information Experiment.”  23 www.bankofcanada.ca/publications/the-economy-plain-and-simple  
 - 15 - as part of our 2021 inflation-target renewal process underscores our interest in this goal.  Moreover, our communications strategy must strive to explain inflation, our target and our policy to different audiences in a clear and accessible manner to deepen their understanding. Our ongoing efforts to reach out and listen to diverse groups of Canadians are helping to strengthen our communications.  While we have benefited from having well-anchored inflation expectations in the past, this mooring will be tested by the very rough economic waters caused by the pandemic.  Our extraordinary policy actions have been firmly focused on attaining our inflation target, by supporting demand and employment throughout this difficult and protracted economic recovery. Through our words—and more importantly, through our actions—we remain steadfast in our commitment to helping restore the Canadian economy and the economic and financial welfare of all Canadians. 
Tiff Macklem: The imperative for public engagementRemarks (delivered virtually) by Mr Tiff Macklem, Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the FederalReserve Bank of Kansas City Jackson Hole Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 27 August2020.*   *   *IntroductionI last spoke at Jackson Hole in 2005. Then, the world had been dealing with a frighteningcoronavirus called SARS. And my topic was the sea change in central bank communicationsand transparency in the Greenspan era.Today, we are discussing the policy response to a more widespread and contagiouscoronavirus, and my topic is the need for a second sea change in central bank communications—from transparency with markets to more engagement with the public. We’ve started, but weneed to accelerate.In a nutshell, we need to spend more effort speaking and listening to the citizens we serve.Diversifying our engagement improves our capacity to make better policy decisions andenhances our legitimacy as public institutions. That is more important now than ever as wegrapple with COVID19 and its harsh economic consequences, which affect everyone. And it willbe critical in the future as we tackle the impact of structural changes to our economies arisingfrom the legacy of COVID19 and those it is amplifying, including digitalization, debt andinequality.While the SARS pandemic didn’t have lasting economic impacts in 2005, the 2008 US sub-primemortgage crisis certainly did. Our economies eventually recovered, but societal scars remain.When too-big-to-fail global banks were bailed out in the crisis—and struggling homeownersweren’t—it stoked the belief that the system is rigged and that globalization benefits a few at theexpense of many. This contributed to the broader decline of trust in public institutions and expertsand a rise in political populism—trends that affect our jobs as central bankers.The last 15 years have also seen a profound change in how information is shared, consumedand debated. The internet slashed the cost of communication. This disrupted traditional mediaand led a growing segment of the public to get their news from alternative channels and socialmedia.Many had hoped that the democratization of information would make us all better informed.Sadly, too often that’s not the case. While the internet and social media have vastly broadenedaccess to information, they are also awash with misinformation, echo chambers and conspiracytheories—often pushed by bots and trolls, sometimes for nefarious purposes.Against this backdrop came the pandemic and its devastating global economic impact. Centralbanks have taken unprecedented monetary policy actions to save livelihoods, support economicrecovery and avoid deflation. For the Bank of Canada, this has meant our first foray intoquantitative easing. Central banks are conducting unconventional monetary policies alongsideextraordinary fiscal stimulus, which is challenging public perceptions of our operationalindependence.So, it is more important—yet harder—for central banks to be trusted sources of information andanalysis. The imperative is to step boldly beyond market transparency and engage with the publicto explain how our actions serve our economy-wide objectives. This means listening to morepeople, understanding their perceptions—accurate or not—factoring broader public views intoour policy decisions and communicating with people on their terms, not ours.1 1 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
Let’s remind ourselves why this matters.First and fundamentally, we are all public servants. The public has a right to understand what weare doing, and we need to be accountable for our actions. Second, we know that monetary policyworks better when people understand it. Third, many central banks are at the lower bound fortheir policy interest rate. In this situation, it is more essential than ever that household inflationexpectations remain anchored on our target, so we can lower real interest rates. We caninfluence those expectations with our communications. That is why many central banks,including the Bank of Canada, are providing unusual forward guidance on our policy rate paths.And there’s a final, existential reason: without public understanding and support for independentcentral banks, we risk losing the public trust that is so core to our mission.Issues in public communicationsBack in Greenspan’s time, central banks didn’t put much effort into tailoring messages to thepublic. Instead, we relied on the media to speak to market participants and economists and theninterpret our messages for the public. Andy Haldane has described this as the practice of centralbankers speaking only to MEN: markets, economists, news agencies.This practice hasn’t been entirely effective. A recent NBER working paper shows that newsarticles about monetary policy are only about half as persuasive in terms of molding inflationexpectations compared with communications that come straight from the central bank. Thebest way to get our messages to the public is to deliver them ourselves.Central banks have been moving toward more direct public engagement. We can all learn fromthe Fed Listens program as well as the Bank of England’s Citizens’ panels and Communityforums. Around the world, central banks are using museums, social media, podcasts,even reggae songs, to tell their stories to their citizens.The Bank of Canada, like others, has taken steps to sharpen its public communications. Wepublish layers of content aimed at different audiences. We produce short animations to illustratethe main points of our flagship publications—the Monetary Policy Report and the FinancialSystem Review—and we promote these across social media channels.We use readability tools to ensure that public speeches are not unnecessarily complex. After all,even an audience as expert as this one is more likely to lose attention if I’m reading what soundslike a PhD dissertation. (Hopefully that’s not what I sound like.)Further, we are working hard to make our communications more relatable to people’s everydaylives. Let’s use this pandemic as an example. COVID19 has caused a huge disinflationaryshock. But we need to recognize that many people don’t feel like inflation is falling when foodinflation has been averaging almost 3 percent. People should know that we are taking that intoaccount when we make policy. Deputy Governor Larry Schembri devoted an entire speech tothis topic earlier this week.A key to enhancing our relatability is listening—engaging the public in conversations. Thepandemic has precluded many traditional events where these conversations can happen. So, weare being nimble with technology to engage stakeholders, including the public. We just launcheda “Let’s Talk Inflation” online campaign as part of our effort to reach out to all Canadians beforethe Bank renews its agreement with the Canadian government on the monetary policy frameworkin 2021.We know that there is a clear correlation between increased understanding and higher levels oftrust. This correlation demands that we devote more effort to economic and financial literacy. Tothat end, the Bank of Canada replaced one of its expert publications with a more accessibledigital magazine, The Economy, Plain and Simple, to explain relevant and timely economic23 2 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
issues to non-expert audiences. We have added a series of simple articles, videos andanimations to explain the ways we’ve responded to the pandemic, covering everything fromquantitative easing to payment systems.An opportunity to build trustIn times of crisis, people look to public authorities for information. This pandemic is no exception.We have seen a sharp increase of internet traffic to our website. Our articles in The Economy,Plain and Simple and our social media posts are getting twice as many page views than beforethe pandemic, while traditional content, such as speeches and our Monetary Policy Report, hasseen traffic increase by more than 10 percent.This heightened interest is an opportunity, and it is critical that we do not squander it. The forcesthat are pushing misinformation on the public are preying on this crisis. A segment of thepopulation still mistrusts public authorities and experts. The independence that is vital for centralbanks and public perceptions of that independence are under threat in many countries.As we work to broaden our engagement, we can be guided by four principles for communicatingeffectively with the public. The first principle is to tell a story that is coherent and consistent withincoming data and over time.Second, public communications should be clear, in plain language and free of jargon. Peopleshould be able to understand what we say—always.The third principle is to make public communications relatable and relevant. We should speak topeople as public servants and peers, not as oracles delivering messages from an ivory tower.The fourth is to listen. We need to find out and understand what is preoccupying the public,including the perspectives of communities and groups we have not been very good at reaching.And we need to address those preoccupations.ConclusionLet me conclude. We have each been asked to suggest legacies of the pandemic. Theselegacies are numerous and far-reaching—the toll of the lives and livelihoods lost, the foregoneeconomic output, social upheaval, changing trade patterns and lasting debt burdens.As we confront these and other legacies, let’s make this another legacy—a deeper relationshipbetween the central bank and its citizens. We can capitalize on this moment by enhancing ourpublic communications through coherent, clear and relatable messages; by helping our citizensunderstand the broader forces at work in our economy; and by listening and understanding howour policies affect everyone. These efforts will help us to make better policy decisions, reinforceour legitimacy and cement trust with our citizens. The stakes are high, and this opportunityshould not be missed.While Canada has been insulated from these trends when compared with the United States and much ofEurope, we have not been immune. At the start of 2020, less than half of Canadians said they trustedgovernment institutions, according to the Edelman Trust Barometer.See www.youtube.com/watch?v=yBv_HVVN-6QO. Coibion, Y. Gorodnichenko and M. Weber, “Monetary Policy Communications and their Effects on HouseholdInflation Expectations,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 25482 (September 2019).123 3 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
Benjamin E Diokno: Opening statement - Hearing of FinancialInstitutions Strategic Transfer BillOpening statement by Mr Benjamin E Diokno, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, thecentral bank of the Philippines), at the Senate Hearing of Financial Institutions Strategic TransferBill, Manila, 2 September 2020.*   *   *We thank the Senate Committee on Banks, Financial Institutions, and Currencies for givingBangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (“BSP”) the opportunity to share its insights and position on thelegislative measures relating to the enactment of Financial Institutions Strategic Transfer Act(“FIST Bill”). BSP appreciates the time and effort this committee has poured into the FIST Bills inorder to facilitate the timely enactment of this economic recovery intervention.BSP recognizes the objectives of FIST Bill to help financial institutions (“FIs”) in their bad debtresolution and non-performing assets (“NPA”) management in response to the adverse impact ofthe COVID-19 pandemic on their financial operations. BSP supports the laudable objectives ofFIST Bill to induce economic activity and improve the liquidity of the financial system, enablingFIs to respond to the looming increase in NPAs, and therefore, propel economic growth. Theenactment of the FIST Law will assist the financial system perform its role of efficiently mobilizingsavings and investments for the country’s economic recovery as well as its sustained growthand development.The banking system has built-in buffers which provide it with the capacity to internalize losses ontheir exposures as well as continue with their lending and investment activities. There is,however, a limit to this risk-bearing capacity of FIs; thus, the establishment of resolutionframeworks, such as the FIST Law, will ensure that distressed FIs have a mechanism tostrengthen their balance sheet.The enactment of the FIST Law can help ease banking system stress through a joint-government and private sector undertaking. It encourages the private sector, governmentfinancial institutions and government-owned-or-controlled corporations to help in the rehabilitationof distressed businesses. Through the sale of NPAs:a. Banks will not have to incur costs related to the management and administration of NPAs,activities that are best left to asset management companies;b. Liquidity within the banking system will increase since this will no longer be tied up in NPAs;andc. Bank capital will be freed-up, thereby increasing the system’s risk-bearing capacity and abilityto expand investment and lending activities.Later on in my presentation, I will discuss the FIST Bill Business Model, the necessity of enactingFIST Bill, and the improvements from the Special Purpose Vehicle Act (“SPV”) of 2002, asamended, introduced in FIST Bill which aim to address the issues and difficulties encounteredduring the implementation of SPV Act and to cater to the present needs of financial institutions,especially in this pandemic.Again, we thank the Committee for giving BSP the opportunity to participate in the passage of thislandmark legislation. 1 / 1BIS central bankers' speeches
2 The Terrace, PO Box 2498, Wellington 6140, New Zealand Telephone 64 4 472 2029 Online at www.rbnz.govt.nz  Promoting the Soundness and Efficiency of our Insurance Sector: Recommencing the IPSA and Solvency Standard Review A speech delivered to the Insurance Council of New Zealand in Wellington On 14 September 2020 By Geoff Bascand, Deputy Governor and General Manager of Financial Stability 
 2     Introduction1  Back in March, I was ready, speech in hand, to provide you all with an insurance update, particularly in relation to our plans for the review of the Insurance (Prudential Supervision) Act, or IPSA, that we started in 2017.   As with many things, COVID-19 intervened. My pandemic insurance was I could always do it later! As I update this speech, different alert level requirements are in place. Again, just like many things I’m contemplating whether I might have to defer again, or do it differently – can one get insurance for multiple, repeated and arguably expected phenomena?    To some degree, this story is a metaphor for the IPSA review. We have started and stopped it a couple of times, due to competing priorities for us and industry. We are now recommencing it. We are confident we can do so sustainably, even with pandemic risks surrounding us.  The IPSA and associated Solvency Standard review, including our approach to the review and its timetable, are the main focus of my address today. I’ll also provide feedback on our view of the insurance sector’s handling of the pandemic so far, as well as an update on the Appointed Actuary Thematic Review, some comments on issues that were significant before COVID-19 and remain in play, and an update on our supervisory approach, including our Auckland presence.   Before coming to the details of the IPSA Review, I want to remark on the importance of insurance and its place in our financial system.  Our insurance markets  Maintaining a sound and efficient insurance sector is important for New Zealand. Customers are used to being able to insure their homes and possessions and obtain life and disability insurance, and businesses utilise a range of insurance products to protect their assets and business interruption exposures.  There are about 90 licensed insurers operating in New Zealand. The sector is highly diverse, ranging from large international companies to tiny specialised entities providing services to                                                 1 I am grateful to James Painter for considerable assistance in the preparation of this speech, and other colleagues for helpful comments. 
 3     particular employee or professional groups. The sector covers home and contents, motor vehicle, travel, life, health, disability, credit, income protection, business interruption, and other products or services. General insurance is the largest sector accounting for 63% of total premiums with life insurance representing 22% and health insurance 14%. The distribution of gross premium between classes of insurance and between insurers is shown in Table 1.  Table 1 - Insurers by size and sector2     IPSA’s treatment of overseas insurers recognises that New Zealand is heavily reliant on foreign-based and foreign-owned life and general insurers. Foreign-owned insurers include insurers operating in New Zealand as locally incorporated subsidiaries of overseas parents and insurers operating as branches.   Table 2 – Share of premium by country of incorporation of insurer3                                                    2 Quarterly Insurer Survey and Insurer Return 3 Quarterly Insurer Survey and Insurer Return 
 4     IPSA provides for some exemptions to insurers operating as branches, providing their home regulator has been approved as meeting IPSA equivalence. Table 2 shows the mix between locally incorporated insurers, which include subsidiaries of overseas insurers, and branches.   Regulatory equivalence between overseas domiciled insurers and locally incorporated insurers is important because customers should be able to regard their insurance product as trustworthy wherever the insurer is based. Insurance isn’t very useful if it can’t be relied upon for pay-out when a claim is made, and our insurance market won’t be efficient or serve New Zealanders well if we have unequal treatment of domestic and foreign insurers.  We want to see insurance remain available and affordable. Widely held property insurance helps manage the social and economic cost of natural hazard events for property owners and communities. It also lowers the potential fiscal costs for the government to facilitate recovery. Property insurance also has wider economic benefits by providing the confidence necessary for economic activity and investment, such as banks requiring evidence of insurance coverage to lend against properties. Similar benefits exist in other forms of insurance - such as life and disability insurance - that support the willingness of individuals and businesses to take risks and protect them from financial hardship.  The Canterbury earthquakes revealed high levels of insurance penetration for home insurance in New Zealand. The interaction between private insurance and the Earthquake Commission has also led to some changes and others continue to be reviewed in relation to EQC and insurers. While there were low levels of non-insurance amongst homeowners, the risk of under-insurance was mitigated because most home insurance was provided on a total replacement basis. Industry experience in managing home insurance claims without a cap on the rebuilding cost led to a change to sum insured policies that cover a specified dollar amount for rebuilding cost. This development changes, to some degree, the allocation of risk between insurers, customers and the state. The risk of underestimating rebuilding costs and having a sum insured that is too low has transferred from the insurer to their customers and, in turn, creates potential for increased economic risks if a significant number of homes cannot be rebuilt because pay-outs do not cover the full rebuild costs.  Life insurers in New Zealand have moved away from offering combined savings and insurance products and the market now primarily offers cover for pure risks, such as premature death, disability and sickness. In doing so, insurance provides families with financial security to preserve financial assets and businesses with financial security to protect key personnel and the interests of owners. A key difference between the life 
 5     insurance sector and the non-life sector appears to be that the extent of insurance take-up, or insurance penetration, for life insurance is low by comparison with other OECD countries. Another key feature of New Zealand’s life insurance sector is the prevalence of relatively high upfront commission rates compared with overseas counterparts, whilst profitability appears to be at least as good as overseas experience.  It’s worth reflecting on the context into which IPSA became law in September 2010 and subsequent developments.  Background to IPSA and subsequent developments  Why we regulate   Going back to why IPSA was enacted, it was considered appropriate to bring New Zealand up-to-date with international standards for prudential regulation. The sector was not broken and there was a desire to avoid regulation that created a compliance mentality. New Zealand’s financial markets regulatory regime is based on the ‘twin peaks’ model with the Reserve Bank administering prudential regulation and the Financial Markets Authority administering conduct regulation.  Market conduct regulation is about ensuring consumers are adequately informed and that market participants act with integrity, with a focus on product disclosure and the behaviour of financial services providers. (Amendments to the conduct legislation are currently before Parliament with a view to strengthening the regulation of conduct by financial institutions (Financial Markets (Conduct of Institutions) Amendment Bill). By contrast, prudential regulation is about institutional soundness, and promoting the maintenance of a sound and efficient financial system.  The Reserve Bank’s philosophical approach to administering IPSA is based on the three pillars of self-discipline, market discipline and regulatory discipline. Self-discipline is closely linked with governance; hence our framework placing primary responsibility for an insurer’s business with its Board and senior management. Market discipline is the influence the market place has on insurers to operate their business prudently. Recognising that market participants have less information about the insurer than the insurer knows about itself and market discipline seeks to address that imbalance, to a degree, by ensuring the disclosure of 
 6     some information. One example is the requirement for insurers to disclosure a financial strength rating to customers.   The regulatory pillar essentially fills the gap between our risk appetite and the outcomes solely achieved through self-discipline and market-discipline. Our risk appetite is a proxy for the public’s risk appetite (informed by public consultation and parliamentary processes). It is lower than the risk appetite of individual insurers because it takes into account costs of failure not borne by insurers themselves but by other, external parties. Minimum requirements imposed under IPSA are therefore designed to be more conservative than an insurer’s management would choose in the absence of regulation.   This does not mean that IPSA is intended to prevent all insurance failures. Whilst a sound and efficient insurance sector is systemically important, failure of a single company doesn’t usually have large spill-over consequences for the rest of the financial system. So we have a moderate tolerance for individual entity failure. We also differentiate supervisory intensity between insurers according to our judgements about the relative impact their failure would have, combined with risks of failure, which generally means focusing supervisory resource on the larger insurers.  The key IPSA provisions (the regulatory pillar) cover capital strength, risk management, governance, fit and proper requirements for key personnel and that insurers are run prudently. Some provisions relate more directly to protecting policyholder interests, such as the requirement for life insurers to maintain statutory funds to protect long-term life insurance assets. We are also bolstering the regulatory pillar through more intensive supervision and enforcement, as discussed further below.  It is important to emphasise that the role of prudential supervision and regulation has not been to dictate the commercial terms on which insurers should be providing insurance. For example, we have not sought to influence the trend towards risk-based pricing. Rather, our involvement has been to better understand what is going on, and to consider its impacts on soundness and efficiency. In its ongoing review of the Reserve Bank Act4, the Government has made an in-principle decision to change the current objective of that Act from ‘soundness and efficiency’ to ‘protecting and promoting financial stability’. The implications of any changes to the high-level policy objectives of the Reserve Bank Act will need to be                                                 4 https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/news/2020/07/introduction-of-bill-marks-exciting-new-phase-for-te-putea-matua 
 7     considered by the IPSA Review, along with other outcomes from the Reserve Bank Act Review.  What is happening with the IPSA Review and why  A policy paper outlining the resumption of the IPSA Review will be published in early October. It will provide an updated overview explaining objectives, topics to be covered and an indicative timetable. We’ll be staying in regular communication with our industry stakeholders as this work progresses, building on earlier consultation feedback. Alongside the IPSA Review document, we will also release a consultation paper on principles to guide the review of Solvency Standards.    We recognise that you are dealing with a busy regulatory environment so it is important that we progress the IPSA review with a mind-set that focuses on improving prudential regulation, not re-inventing features of the framework that appear to be working well. The starting point is that we have a regime that is not broken, but has been significantly tested in its relatively short lifetime, and lessons can be learned and applied to improvements. Your feedback will be crucial to helping us shape the regime in an efficient and effective matter.  The reasons for enacting IPSA have not changed, but what has changed is the experience on which further refinements can be considered. Since 2010, the Reserve Bank and insurers have gained considerable experience across the legislation, helping us to see what works well and what could be enhanced. There has been a high level of activity in relation to transfers of business between insurers, changes of control and insurers entering or exiting the market. The AMP/Resolution Life transaction is a notable example.  IPSA powers have also been used in relation to solvency-level settings for some insurers, as well as in other areas such as risk management. The Canterbury earthquakes, which commenced just a few days before the enactment of IPSA, resulted in an intense period of supervisory activity and application of IPSA provisions.  Some administrative features of IPSA have proved cumbersome to utilise and could be improved. Issues arising amongst some insurers in relation to matters such as capital management and the quality of risk management and governance sometimes revealed scope for improvements in the form of more specific definitions or guidance.  
 8     More specific provisions and definitions and clearer guidance on some matters would reduce scope for outcomes to be quite so dependent on firm’s interpretation of sufficient self-discipline.  Solvency margin settings is one area in which provisions might be made more specific. We intend to re-start the review of the solvency standards alongside the broader IPSA Review in October, applying the same regulatory pillar philosophy by evaluating prudential safety against risks. Solvency standards define the amount of capital an insurer is required to hold to protect against costs from unforeseen events.  A criticism of the approach towards capital adequacy within the current solvency standards is that it represents something of an “all or nothing” solvency measure whereby a solvency ratio above 100% (or any alternative regulated figure) is taken to be adequate and a ratio of less than 100% is taken to be inadequate. Thought will be given to a more graduated approach where there is more than one level of capital requirement. Using such an approach, the different levels of capital requirement provide trigger points for intervention. The closer the trigger point is to the minimum capital requirement, the greater the level of supervisory intensity or intervention. Any buffer above the statutory minimum is currently at the discretion of the insurer, although the Reserve Bank can impose higher solvency margin licence conditions.    Over the years, we have observed a declining trend in solvency margins that may be illustrative of a key difference in approach between insurers and the prudential regulator. Insurers must balance the need to maintain a sensible level of capital strength against the expectations of investors for a return on investment. Higher levels of capital make for a more resilient insurer but at the cost of lower return on equity. Prudential regulators tend to focus on low probability but high impact risks, or ‘tail end risks’, and a concern about the what-ifs in the event of extreme impacts. Of course, checks and balances exist within insurers, but without prudential oversight, competitive forces alone are not always compatible with adequately addressing tail end risks. In other words, the risk-appetite of equity-holders will not always be compatible with the risk-appetite of society. The outcome of this is that solvency buffers above the minimum are getting thinner which, by definition, means that the risks of insurers breaching minimum solvency requirements are increasing. The retention of capital, largely because of dividend payments being withheld, has seen a recent, but probably temporary, change in this overall trend. I’ll come to this again later.  
 9     An over-arching consideration for the review of solvency standards will be an assessment of the impact that changes from the introduction of IFRS 17 will bring. IFRS 17 is the international financial reporting standard that, by 1 January 2023, will replace IFRS 4 on accounting for insurance contracts. This change represents a fundamental impact, because solvency standards are based on accepting financial values generated from the production of insurers’ financial statements.  Provisions within IPSA distinguish between life insurers and non-life insurers by having separate solvency standards as well as the statutory fund requirements for life insurers.  Some prudential requirements of some overseas jurisdictions are recognised under IPSA in the form of a limited range of exemptions. This only applies where overseas requirements have been assessed as meeting equivalence with IPSA and is restricted to provisions in relation to solvency, governance and some fit and proper matters. Some overseas insurers are active in New Zealand but below the threshold of activity that triggers a licensing requirement5. It is appropriate for the IPSA Review to re-visit the definition of ‘carrying on insurance business in New Zealand’ and to consider concerns such as the possibility that there is a growing non-licensed insurance sector. Similarly, the definitions of ‘carrying on insurance business in New Zealand’, or ‘contracts of insurance’ result in some arrangements appearing to the general public to be insurance provided by licensed insurers when they are not. For example, products that protect against non-completion of building work and defects are available as guarantees and insurance. As a broad generalisation, a guarantee provides an assurance that something will be fixed whilst insurance provides equivalent compensation for the loss, which might be through fixing it or by some other form of settlement. There will always be boundary issues with regulation but the IPSA Review provides an opportunity to reflect on whether the current boundary is in the best place.   Other factors that will help to inform the IPSA review include recommendations from two external reviews of insurance regulation and supervision. These were an IMF Financial Sector Assessment Programme6 (‘FSAP’) in 2017 that assessed New Zealand compliance against international standards for prudential supervision of insurers, followed by an independent review of Reserve Bank Supervision of CBL in 20197. Other developments that                                                 5 Significant factors that indicate an overseas entity is carrying on insurance business in New Zealand include (but is not limited to) having a physical place of business, staff or infrastructure in New Zealand or actively and directly advertising or soliciting business within New Zealand. 6 https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/news/2017/07/bulletin-article-reviews-outcomes-of-imfs-financial-sector-assessment-programme 7 https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/ReserveBank/Files/regulation-and-supervision/insurers/CBL-RBNZ-Final-Report.pdf 
 10     provide material for consideration in the IPSA review include the FMA/RBNZ Thematic Review of Life Insurer Conduct and Culture, the Thematic Review of the Appointed Actuary regime, and the amendments in train to the conduct legislation.  As it stands, our plan is to resume the IPSA review from October with:   The release of an initial overview paper;   Commencement of a consultation on the Solvency Standards at the same time;  Subsequent consultation papers on various components of the review during 2021 to 2023.   We welcome feedback through the formal processes associated with the consultation papers as well as being open to engagement and discussions on a continuous basis throughout the Review’s duration. Details will be covered in October’s paper.  We envisage a staggered implementation of changes, ranging from operational changes that might be relatively easy to implement, through to legislative changes that require decisions from Parliament. This impacts on timeframe and our estimated completion date is 2024. The Solvency Standard is an example. It will need to be revised for IFRS 17 by end-2021, and is expected to be further revised to align with the IPSA changes by 2024.  The ongoing impacts of COVID-19 on the sector  As we reported in our May Financial Stability Report, there is considerable uncertainty as to how COVID-19 and the associated economic downturn will affect New Zealand insurers. Whilst death and disability claims do not currently pose a threat to the solvency of life insurers, COVID-19 could play out in a number of ways, including the possibility of further waves of infection.  The initial economic responses to the pandemic created major disruptions to economic activity - particularly travel - and that has been reflected in travel insurance claims. Other key areas of impact or potential impact include credit insurance in relation to unemployment and impacts on investment portfolios. Overseas, there are also some questions about the scope of business interruption insurance and liability in relation to COVID-19 related claims and many will be watching closely to see if outcomes from ongoing court cases have implications for local insurers. Low interest rates have impacted some insurers adversely and this factor will continue to materialise in the next few years. 
 11      Insurers adapted quickly to working under the lockdown environment and we sensed an almost routine response by insurers to the recent return to Level 3 in Auckland and Level 2 elsewhere. We’ve also noted the various ways in which insurers have sought to provide customer-focused responses to hardships arising from COVID-19.  Our stance in relation to prudential risks to insurers from COVID-19 is that there are many unknowns still to play out in terms of flow-on impacts from what we have already experienced, as well as the potential for new outbreaks.  This caution is also reflected in our stance on capital retention and dividend payments, which we regard as being imprudent under these conditions. We will update insurers on our stance on this at or before publication of the next Financial Stability Report in November.    Appointed Actuary Review  Appointed actuaries have a critical legislated role to measure and report on material risks and the role also entails providing impartial advice to an insurer’s board and senior management to assist with decision-making. Insurance is about known and unknown risks and strong, independently minded actuarial advice is crucial to managing risks. This was the backdrop to our recent Appointed Actuary Review8, so that we could better understand how the Appointed Actuary role works in practice for insurers, actuaries and the Reserve Bank, and to identify potential areas of improvement to make the role and regime more effective.  We selected 15 insurers and their appointed actuaries for the review and published our findings and recommendations in June. The input and participation from industry stakeholders in this review was incredibly helpful, and we look forward to similar constructive engagement in the IPSA review I’d like to take this opportunity to again thank all those that participated.   The review concluded that the regime and appointed actuary role are largely effective but that improvements should be made, including; the need for clarity and guidance around the Reserve Bank’s expectations of the appointed actuary role; limiting the risk that the impartiality of appointed actuaries could be adversely impacted by factors such as the                                                 8 https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/ReserveBank/Files/News/2020/Appointed-Actuary-Thematic-Review.pdf 
 12     influences of senior managers and reporting lines; and strengthening the Reserve Bank’s oversight role.  We have used the findings to outline our expectations of the appointed actuary regime in a policy note which we will follow up with formal guidance.  Other risks to the sector and the Reserve Bank’s planned response  From a Reserve Bank perspective, the key themes within the insurance sector that existed before COVID-19 were risk-based pricing of property insurance, impacts from low interest rates, an overall trend of declining solvency ratios and findings from the joint FMA/Reserve Bank review into conduct and culture. Alongside these issues, the sector, like other sectors, faces increasing cyber risks and climate change risks.  Cyber risks take on increasing importance when business models are continually digitised with customer platforms and data management central to business performance.  We will issue cyber guidance for the banking sector in the fourth quarter that will be relevant for insurers also.  Like many central banks, the Reserve Bank has a strong interest in climate change. Climate change poses significant risks to New Zealand’s economy and financial system – and therefore financial stability. The medium-to long-term risks to financial institutions from climate change remain relevant through and well beyond the current crisis. As the Bank of England’s Executive Director of Insurance Supervision Anna Sweeney said at Moody’s Insurance Summit last week9: “Climate risk remains a real and credible threat to the integrity and soundness of the global insurance industry which, without significant action now, will only get more pronounced in the future”.  That is why the Reserve Bank has developed a climate strategy and is collaborating internationally on climate. We are proud members of the Sustainable Insurance Forum (SIF) and the Network for Greening the Financial System (NGFS) and we are leveraging our involvement in these global forums to step up our understanding and supervision of climate-related risks. For example, last month we drew on resources from the NGFS and the SIF train our supervisors in climate risks. Insurers can anticipate being asked about climate                                                 9 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/speech/2020/paving-the-way-forward-managing-climate-risk-in-the-insurance-sector-speech-by-anna-sweeney.pdf?la=en&hash=35D74A884840C7D5C7BB58B2C79224E512A003FC  
 13     change risks, governance and strategy in upcoming discussions with their supervisor. We will keep intensifying our supervision of climate-related risks.  In this world of heightened risk there are corresponding stakeholder expectations of confidence in our regulatory approach. As we implement recommendations from the 2017 IMF Financial Sector Assessment Programme, the independent review of Reserve Bank Supervision of CBL, and continue to seek improvements in insurer conduct and culture, we are making changes to strengthen our resourcing and supervisory approach. The key developments you can expect to see from this will be more intense supervision, particularly in relation to verifying information received from insurers, and concluding enquiries more efficiently. We will be supported with more resources to be able to achieve these outcomes.  As previously indicated, we are increasing our supervisory presence on the ground in Auckland. This is making good progress with the appointment of a Senior Manager Supervision, and from 2021 we plan to be supervising some insurers from Auckland. The implementation of an Auckland presence and increasing supervisory and enforcement resources are part of the ongoing development of our regulatory approach.   We will retain a risk-based approach that includes our split of insurers into the Portfolio group, consisting of insurers whose failure would have a relatively small impact on the sector, and the Designated group, consisting of insurers whose failure would result in greater impacts and more intense supervision. What we mean by more intense supervision is that we will seek to resolve supervisory concerns more effectively and decisively by obtaining the information we need when we need it, verifying the integrity of the information provided and arriving at a timely decision and resolution. Increased resources will also enable us to cover more ground and ensure that key topics, such as cyber risk and climate change are appropriately covered.  We will keep you informed of these developments and of the changes they bring about to our interactions with you.  Conclusion  Insurance is an important financial service to many households – providing valuable protection against risks to housing and other assets, and against income loss in a number of forms. It supports credit markets, reducing risks to bank and no-bank lenders, and it helps avoid significant financial distress.  
 14     The Canterbury earthquake, the COVID-19 pandemic, and historically low interest rates have challenged various parts of the sector in extraordinary ways.   The insurance sector has been prudentially regulated in New Zealand since 2010 and it is timely to review the efficacy of regulatory settings. We look forward to your continued input on this important process, so together we can continue to ensure the best outcomes for New Zealanders. 
Fraziali Ismail: COVID-19 and climate change, collectiveresponsibility, commitment, and collaborationClosing remarks by Mr Fraziali Ismail, Assistant Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia (BankNegara Malaysia), at Malaysia Showcase during Climate Week NYC 2020, New York City, 17September 2020.*   *   *From time to time, we chance upon heart-warming stories of how seemingly small and randomacts of kindness, result in something miraculous. I am talking about stories like Jadav Payeng, anenvironmental activist and forest worker from India, who planted a tree almost every single dayfor 40 years.Jadav was only 16 when he started working with the district’s social forestry division in a treeplantation drive. Upon completion of the 5-year project, Jadav chose to stay and continued on hisquest to save his island. This led him to single-handedly create a real man-made forest, the MolaiForest, which houses several species of animals and thousands of trees that is now almost asbig as New York’s Central Park.We also marvel at Afroz Shaz, who began picking up trash on Versova Beach in Mumbai, andinspired thousands of volunteers to join the cause. Versova’s dramatic transformation from filthyto fabulous went viral in India, with praises to Afroz and the volunteers for helping to restore thebeach that was previously polluted by 15 years of piled up rubbish.In reading these stories, I could not help but think, if these individual acts could result in suchoutstanding outcomes, surely we can achieve a lot more given our resources, capabilities andoutreach?With this, I would like to speak on COVID-19 and climate change, Collective responsibility,Commitment, and Collaboration. That’s 4 Cs. But before that, let me begin by thanking theorganiser Climate Governance Malaysia, for inviting me to speak today and for successfullyorganising this event.COVID-19 & Climate ChangeMy first C is “COVID-19 and climate change”. The fight against the COVID-19 pandemic bringsinto sharp focus the balance between safeguarding public health and the economy. Parallelshave been drawn between this very current policy challenge and our struggle to manage climaterisks. There are both differences and similarities. COVID-19 represents a singular commonenemy, while climate risks are more multi-faceted. It could also be argued that the timedimension also differs, with COVID-19 being more immediate whilst climate challenges oftencome and go with climatic events. Given the latter, oftentimes our intensity to tackle climatechange also ebbs and flows. But despite all this, the single biggest common point is thedevastation that both COVID-19 and climate change bring to our lives and livelihood.Hence, there is a silver lining to this current health crisis. The pandemic was once a distant issueor someone else’s problem. Now, everyone from Australia to Zimbabwe is experiencing its fullbrunt. It is therefore an opportune time to reflect, reset and reprioritise. The world now has aunique opportunity – an opportunity to galvanise a deeper appreciation and understanding of theissues that affect us all – globally and simultaneously. Policymakers tackling the health crisishave been encouraged to pursue policies that can alleviate the economic shocks caused by thepandemic and in the same instant help address climate issues and challenges. We can leveragethe opportunity presented by the current crisis to put the world on a new trajectory with a lowerrisk of future climate calamities. 1 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
Collective responsibilityThis brings me to my second C that is “collective responsibility”. The former Managing Directorof IMF, Madam Lagarde once remarked that “Tackling climate change is a collective endeavour, itmeans collective accountability and it’s not too late”. Malaysia, together with its ASEANcounterparts, has been responding to climate change by developing national sustainableroadmaps, principles and guidelines. Such actions are even more relevant now. Despite a morepressing public health crisis at the moment, the World Health Organization has warned that“climate change is a gradually increasing stress that may be the defining public health threat ofthe 21st century”. Now why is this? That’s because temperature and weather extremes, floods,and pollutants can impact human health, directly and indirectly. The pandemic thus stresses theneed to progressively continue collective global climate change actions to reduce risk of futureepidemics.CommitmentThis brings me to my third C, which is “commitment”. We need strong commitment to combatclimate change and take immediate actions to take charge of future economic growth. Forcorporations and businesses, over and above concerns on regulation and legal risks, is the needto commit to invest in doing the right thing for “people, profit and planet”. Corporations andbusinesses that align their policy and advocacy agenda to climate action have an important rolein averting a path towards climate catastrophe.As we forge the path towards a climate conscious future, and for the whole system to change atthe needed pace and scale, policy makers need to step up as well. For emerging economiessuch as Malaysia, there is a careful policy balance between transitioning to a low-carboneconomy while addressing needs of society and businesses. This is meant to minimiseunintended consequences of channelling financing towards non-green and non-sustainablepractices and to minimise transition risk.As the central bank, Bank Negara Malaysia is cognisant of this in crafting our strategies torespond to climate risk. Our commitment stems from the direct relevance that climate changehas to our mandates in preserving monetary stability and financial stability. Approximately 11.7%of Malaysian financial institutions assets are potentially exposed to climate change. Our aim is toensure that financial institutions are adequately measuring, mitigating and building buffers againstclimate risk. Our target is for climate risk to be featured more visibly in the risk managementpractices of financial institutions by 2022. Of equal importance is our resolve to build theircapacity to become effective agents of change in facilitating transition towards a low-carboneconomy.A common language to categorise economic activities to help facilitate financial flows towardsactivities that would support the transition to a lower carbon economy, is therefore paramount.For this purpose, the Bank issued the Climate Change and Principles-Based TaxonomyDiscussion Paper in December 2019. The taxonomy is now undergoing further refinements, anda pilot implementation for selected financial institutions will commence this month.CollaborationOn to my final C, “collaboration”. In his quest to clean up Versova beach, Afroz Shaz would nothave been as successful had he acted alone. He had help from organisations and volunteersfrom over 12 countries. The Versova Beach clean-up was one of the largest citizen initiatives theworld has even seen. In the same vein, the Bank values contribution and collaboration withvarious stakeholders. This includes the financial industry in planning an orderly transition towardsa more climate-resilient economy. The Joint Committee on Climate Change (or “JC3”) was setup in September 2019 as a platform for financial regulators and financial institutions in Malaysia 2 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
to work together to deepen our understanding on climate risks and develop tools to effectivelyrespond to those risks. The JC3 is chaired by the Bank and Securities Commission Malaysia,with Bursa Malaysia and 19 financial institutions as members. Now I am pleased to inform thatthe JC3 is one of the collaborators with CGM, together with the Institute of Corporate DirectorsMalaysia (ICDM) and Islamic Markets in organising today’s forum.The Bank envisions that financial industry players and others from the private sector will playmore proactive roles in increasing funding pathways for green and sustainability related projects.By stepping up such efforts, there would be more innovative financial instruments or alternativefinancing, sustainable or green bonds or sukuk that would support the Government’s climatechange agenda.Ladies and gentlemen,The severity and abruptness of the current health crisis do not make climate crisis any lesspressing. The resilience of our future economy and financial system will depend on the actionswe take now in building climate and societal resilience. This is a sobering reality, one we musttake full accountability of, and pledge strong commitment to. This pandemic has not onlyprovided valuable lessons to us on the grave consequences of being ill-prepared when facing acrisis. It is also a strong reminder that sustainability must play a crucial role in our economicrecovery and reset.As a central banker, it is not often that I talk about global health – but the current pandemic haschallenged me to be more conversant of such issues. The same applies to the topic of climatechange which was not in the central banks’ dictionary until recently. But that is the reality ofdevelopment – we will continuously be called upon to respond to new and unfamiliar challengesand to effectuate changes wherever we can. I am optimistic that we can all contribute to do ourpart to make the change that is required. Global awareness on climate change and its risks beingshowcased today and during this Climate Week is reflective of a world that is determined to riseto the immense challenges before us. Thank you again to the organiser of this event and to allparticipants. I look forward to more meaningful engagements on this issue as we continue thisonward march for a better life and a better future for our children and for mankind.Thank you. 3 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
Distinguished media representatives,  First of all, let me thank you for your presence at this year-end conference and for the continuous and effective cooperation we have cultivated over the years in order to properly inform the public about the economic and financial developments in the country. Communication with the media is always a very important part of the CBK activity, but in this very challenging year for all of us, communication with the media has been extremely important. Through fair reporting from your part, we have managed to keep the public well informed about developments and mitigation measures in the country's economy, influencing the behavior of the public in relation to the conditions created in the economy to be rational. Therefore, I would like to take this opportunity to express my high appreciation for the sacrifice and professionalism shown during this difficult year. *** Despite the difficulties we have faced, I am happy that the Central Bank of the Republic of Kosovo has managed to implement its objectives this year as well, ensuring a stable financial system, which not only managed to withstand the developments of unfavorable economic situation in the country, but also became one of the main pillars of support for businesses and individuals who faced financial difficulties due to the pandemic crisis. *** Now, let me present to you a summary of the developments that characterized the country's economy and financial system during this year, based on the latest data available to the relevant sectors.  As in the rest of the world, in Kosovo, the measures taken to prevent the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic severely affected economic activity, causing the country to face economic downturn after a very long period of economic growth. According to CBK forecasts, Kosovo's economy in 2020 is expected to decline by 7.2 percent in real terms, which represents the heaviest blow to the economy in 20 years. Restriction of the functioning of many economic activities has negatively 
affected the disposable income of citizens, thus negatively affecting the level of domestic consumption. Also, the weakening of the financial performance of businesses, together with the uncertainty for the future period, have caused a significant decline in investment. Significant impact on the decline of economic activity in Kosovo also had the measures to restrict movement from other countries, which greatly reduced the visits of our diaspora in Kosovo, these visits which represent a very important source of funding for the economy of country. Based on data recorded until September 2020, the expenditures of non-residents in Kosovo, most of which are from the diaspora, were 470 million Euros, which represents a decrease of about 60 percent compared to the same period of the previous year.   On the other hand, when it comes to the connection of the diaspora with our economy, a factor that has influenced the mitigation of the effects of the crisis have been remittances from the diaspora, which even in these very difficult times for the world economy, continued the steady flow towards our economy. The value of remittances received until October 2020 was 796.5 million Euros, which represents an annual increase of 12.9 percent. Developments in the global economy as a result of the pandemic have also affected foreign trade. The decrease in domestic demand in Kosovo during this year was reflected in a lower value of imports of goods, which by October 2020 marked the value of 2.63 billion Euros or an annual decline of 8 percent. On the other hand, exports of goods amounted to Euro 382.4 million, marking an annual increase of 19.1 percent, mainly based on the increase in exports of base metals. As a result of these developments, the trade deficit in the goods account during this period recorded a value of 2.26 billion Euros, which represents an annual decline of 11.4 percent.   On the other hand, the export of services amounted to 731 million Euros, marking an annual decline of 48 percent, which occurred mainly as a result of the decline in visits of our compatriots and tourists in the country. The decline in imports of services was also characterized by a value of 434 million, marking an annual decline of 24.7 percent. 
Including goods and services, it turns out that the total value of exports until September 2020 was about 1 billion Euros, while total imports were about 2.6 billion Euros. The trade deficit, including the goods and services account, amounted to 1.6 billion Euros, or about 22 percent of Gross Domestic Product, from about 18 percent in the same period last year. In terms of foreign direct investment, their value by September 2020 reached 250.6 million Euros, compared to the value of 216.4 million Euros recorded until September 2019. During this period, growth was mainly recorded by FDI in the sector of the financial services, which amounted to 66.2 million Euros, compared to the value of 10.9 million Euros recorded until September 2019. On the other hand, real estate investments, which represent the main category of FDI in Kosovo, decreased to 135.8 million Euros, from 176.2 million Euros a year ago. Regarding other macroeconomic indicators, it is worth noting that the average annual inflation rate until November 2020 was 0.2 percent compared to the rate of 2.7 percent recorded in 2019. This price movement trend reflects price dynamics in international markets, but also the decline of general economic activity in Kosovo during this year. *** Now, let me move on to the developments in the country's financial system: In accordance with the new conditions that were created in the country's economy, the CBK was proactive in reacting quickly in order to maintain the normal functioning and stability of the financial system and, at the same time, to put the financial system at the service of the economy. *** In this way, from the first days of the restrictive measures, the CBK activated the Work Continuity Team, which had the task of monitoring and providing instructions that ensure the smooth running of the CBK and the financial system in general. In this way, the regular functioning of the payment and cash supply system throughout the country was ensured at all times, including the areas which have been isolated for a longer period of time. 
The Central Bank, since 2016 has developed and operates an interbank system of secure and stable payments, which is based on international standards and best practices. During this year the number of bank accounts has reached 2.26 million accounts, or an increase in the number of bank accounts of 4.3 percent, which can be justified by the need for businesses and individuals to open bank accounts to benefit from the Government’s economic facilitation measures.. Also, compared to the same period last year, there was an increase of 22.4 percent of accounts that have access to e-banking, where the number of e-banking accounts until October 2020 is 393 thousand.  Also, during 2020, the CBK has fulfilled the provision of a qualitative and quantitative supply of Euro banknotes and coins for the banking sector in order to settle cash transactions of the economy and citizens. In order to deal as effectively as possible with the created conditions, the CBK has continuously been in coordination with all institutions of Kosovo, financial institutions in Kosovo, chambers of commerce, as well as international financial institutions, holding very frequent meetings to ensure that adequate and timely measures are taken against the needs of the economy. From the beginning, the CBK was part of the inter-institutional group for designing emergency measures to help the economy, and then to draft the economic recovery plan, which a few days ago was approved by the Assembly of Kosovo through the passage of the Law on Economic Recovery. As a result of our ongoing communications, RFI (Rapid Financing Instrument) has been approved by the IMF in the amount of 52 million Euros to cover urgent and temporary balance of payments needs as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Also, after coordination with the central banks of the region, the European Central Bank has approved the request of the CBK to establish a repo financing line in the amount of 100 million Euros. This line of financing enables the CBK to borrow liquidity in Euro currency from the Eurosystem, to address the potential liquidity needs of financial institutions in Kosovo in the event of market dysfunction due to the COVID-19 pandemic. 
Seeing that the country's economy was entering a pronounced crisis, where businesses and citizens were facing great financial difficulties, the CBK, based on international best practices and in cooperation with lending institutions in Kosovo, undertook a series of measures to help the economy cope more easily with the challenges of this crisis. These measures initially consisted of applying a moratorium on loan repayments without any punitive measures for all borrowers who have been adversely affected by the pandemic. This moratorium has temporarily relieved the borrower of the loan repayment burden, thus improving their liquidity position to finance other needs. Following the end of the moratorium period, the CBK has published a guide to loan restructuring in order to establish the criteria on which the loan restructuring process should be based for borrowers who have encountered financial difficulties as a result of the pandemic. The Credit Restructuring Guide has made it possible to ease the credit burden on borrowers without implicating any deterioration in their classification in the Kosovo credit register. The measures taken by the CBK were assessed as very adequate, both by the local public and by international financial institutions such as the International Monetary Fund in the Article IV report on Kosovo and the World Bank. Also, the Central Bank of the Republic of Kosovo has welcomed the conclusions drawn in the report of the European Commission for Kosovo for 2019, which recognizes the commitment and reforms undertaken in the financial sector. The EC report has devoted a special space to developments related to the impact of the pandemic on Kosovo's economy, highlighting the measures taken by the CBK to assist borrowers in overcoming the financial difficulties that have arisen as a consequence of the crisis. In the context of international assessments, it is worth mentioning the report of the US Department of State on the investment climate for 2020 for Kosovo, which gave a high assessment of the country's financial system. This report also highlights the stability of the banking sector, which remains well-capitalized and profitable, as well as the significant improvement in recent years. 
The economic crisis found the banking sector of Kosovo in a very sound condition, characterized by a high degree of liquidity, high level of capitalization and very good quality of the loan portfolio with a share of just over 2 percent of non-performing loans. This enabled the banking sector not only to withstand the increased risks, but also to play a key role in the process of economic recovery. The contribution of the banking sector to support the economy was very important in terms of continued lending, despite the increase in the level of risks faced by banks. During January-October 2020, the value of new loans issued by the banking sector was 1.2 billion Euros, while the total value of active loans in the banking sector in October 2020 was 3.2 billion Euros, which represents an annual increase of 7 percent. Currently, even after taking all these not very common measures for a banking sector and an economy which is in a phase of recession, the banking sector of Kosovo continues to have a high level of stability and is ready to play its key role to the economic recovery process. The economic recovery package just approved by the Assembly of Kosovo foresees a very important role for the banking sector. A very important part of this package is based on loan guarantee schemes and interest rate subsidies, which will facilitate and improve the flow of bank financing towards the country's economy. Total assets of the banking sector have continued the growth trend during this year, reaching the value of 5.05 billion Euros in October 2020, which represents an annual growth of 10.3 percent. The banking sector continues to enjoy high public confidence, which is also expressed by the continuous growth of deposits. In October 2020, the total value of deposits was about 4.1 billion Euros, representing an annual increase of 8.7 percent. The growth rate of total deposits is mainly dictated by household deposits, a category that dominates the structure of total deposits in the banking sector with a share of 67 percent in total deposits, which in 2020 marked an increase of 7.3 percent. Interest rates on loans continued their downward trend, declining to 6.3 percent from 6.5 percent in the same period last year, which indicates a continuous facilitation of access to bank financing. Financial soundness indicators continued to show a high level of sustainability of this sector in all aspects. It is worth noting 
the good quality of the loan portfolio with a non-performing loan rate of only 2.7 percent in October 2020, which marked a slight increase compared to last year when it was 2.2 percent. The coverage of non-performing loans with loan loss provisions remains at high levels of 140 percent, which indicates adequate levels of provisions in the banking sector. The banking sector continues to have a high capital adequacy ratio of 16.9 percent in October 2020, compared to 16.5 percent in the previous year, which continues to remain significantly above the minimum regulatory level of 12.0 percent. In order to maintain sound levels of capital within the banking system and to support Kosovo's economy through lending, the CBK has decided to suspend the distribution of dividends by banks for 2019 and 2020. The liquidity position of the banking sector remains high. The ratio of liquid assets to short-term liabilities in October 2020 was 36.1 percent, which was high above the required regulatory minimum of 25.0 percent. In addition to the banking sector, microfinance and non-bank financial institutions also have an important role in the credit financing of Kosovo's economy, which mainly focus on providing microcredit. The total value of loans to this sector in October 2020 was 220 million Euros, which represents an annual increase of 1.4 percent. In the insurance sector, until September 2020, a slight decline in activity was recorded. Gross written premiums until September 2020 were 72.3 million Euros, which is a decrease of 2.2 percent compared to the same period last year. Claims paid by the insurance sector during this period amounted to 35 million Euros, a slight increase compared to the same period last year when they were 34.5 million Euros. Total assets of the insurance sector have continued the growth trend during this year, reaching the amount of 214.3 million Euros in September 2020, with an annual increase of 9.3 percent. As a result of the aggravated financial situation and non-compliance with legal requirements for capital, as well as in order to improve the financial situation, in 
order to protect policyholders and ensure financial stability of the sector, the CBK during this year has decided to place under temporary administration the insurer "Kosova e Re". This decision is a continuation of a series of measures taken by the CBK to increase the sustainability of the insurance sector, in order to ensure a stable sector and in accordance with the legal requirements of the CBK. Regarding the pension sector, despite the decline in the value of investments at the beginning of the pandemic, the performance of international financial markets has steadily improved in recent months and the value of the decline in the value of these investments has already recovered. The return on investment of the Kosovo Pension Savings Trust by the end of September 2020 was positive at a rate of 12.5 percent. The economic recovery package envisions injecting a significant amount of money into the economy (around € 220 million) enabling pension contributors to withdraw 10 per cent of their pension savings. The CBK has played a very important role in the operational realization of this process by providing the Funds with the data of the bank accounts of the pension contributors through the Register of Bank Accounts in order to validate the accounts of the contributors, and to eliminate the errors of possible in making the 10 percent payment. *** Despite the situation created due to the pandemic and not very favorable conditions in international markets, the Central Bank of the Republic of Kosovo has managed to maintain its financial stability and good performance of the institution. The CBK remains committed to continue its activity in the service of stability and development of the country's economy, creating the conditions for the development of a stable financial infrastructure, in line with contemporary developments in this field, including the development of new segments of the financial system such as the capital market, which requires a broad inter-institutional interaction.   Also, the CBK remains committed to base the development of the financial system on the principles of developing sound competition and free movement of capital, thus promoting the continuous increase of efficiency in the financial system. 
Let me express my gratitude to the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) and the Office of the Language Commissioner for awarding the 2020 “Best practice in law enforcement for the use of languages "for the CBK. Also, I would like to inform you that the CBK this year has continued with the announcement of the competition, already traditional, for the award "Young Economist", in which case I would like to thank and congratulate all candidates for the works they have submitted  within this competition. This activity aims to promote research activity in the field of economics among young people. Based on the evaluation of the professional commission for the evaluation of these works, today I have the pleasure to announce the winner of this award, Mr. Qendrim Shkodra with the topic " Kosovo's economy in the time of the Pandemic, the impacts of COVID-19 on the local and international economy ". Finally, hoping and believing that next year will be a more positive year in all aspects, I wish you good health, joy and success to all of you and your families. 
   Response to COVID-19 and Medium- to Long-Term Challenges for Japan's Economy: With an Eye on the Post-COVID-19 Era Speech at the Meeting of Councillors of Nippon Keidanren (Japan Business Federation) in Tokyo Bank of Japan December 24, 2020   KURODA Haruhiko Governor of the Bank of Japan (English translation based on the Japanese original) 
 1  Introduction It is a great honor to have this opportunity to address such a distinguished gathering of business leaders in Japan today.  For eight years now, I have delivered a speech at this end-of-year meeting, and I can say that this year we have experienced enormous changes in the social and economic environment due to the shock of the novel coronavirus (COVID-19). As we wrap up 2020, I would first like to take a look back at economic developments this year, mainly focusing on the impact of COVID-19, and talk about the outlook for economic activity and prices. Then, I will explain the Bank of Japan's thinking behind its policy responses. In relation to the conduct of monetary policy, I will also touch on the conduct of the assessment for further effective and sustainable monetary easing, which the Bank decided at the Monetary Policy Meeting (MPM) held last week. Lastly, I would like to talk about what is necessary in taking advantage of lessons to be learned from overcoming the current crisis for future growth -- that is, challenges regarding Japan's economy as a whole that should be addressed when also looking ahead to the post-COVID-19 era from a medium- to long-term perspective.  I. Economic and Price Developments during the COVID-19 Era and Their Outlook Impact of COVID-19 on the Economy Let me start with a look back at economic developments this year, mainly focusing on the impact of COVID-19.  COVID-19 started to spread from the beginning of the year and became a pandemic within a short period toward early spring (Chart 1). Governments around the world took strict and wide-ranging public health measures in order to prevent the spread. Under these circumstances, the global economy became depressed significantly. However, since the summer season, as public health measures have been eased, the global economy has picked up from that state of significant depression, as seen in the growth rates of each country turning positive on a quarter-on-quarter basis. Similar developments have been observed in Japan. The quarter-on-quarter GDP growth rate for the April-June quarter registered a considerably negative figure of minus 8.3 percent with wide-ranging economic activities 
 2  being constrained. However, that for the July-September quarter turned positive, to 5.3 percent, and Japan's economy has picked up from the bottom, although it has remained in a severe situation.  The economic fluctuation this time is different in nature from what was seen in the past. Most of the fluctuations since World War II were triggered by cyclical adjustments in business fixed investment and in inventory investment, or by financial imbalances. On the other hand, the current fluctuation is exceptional, in that it stemmed from a shock caused by an infectious disease, which is not inherent in the economy, and that economic activity has been constrained exogenously with a view to preventing the spread of the disease. In other words, such activity has been affected largely by an epidemiologic factor.  Reflecting the characteristics of COVID-19, economic activities that involve social interaction are particularly affected, and this is another point that is unique to the current case (Chart 2). Looking at economic activities of firms in Japan by sector, a significant decline has been seen in the industry of face-to-face services such as eating and drinking as well as accommodations -- where firms are relatively small -- and amusement services including events. In terms of household spending, consumption of services has declined considerably compared with that of goods. A constraint on services consumption is due to vigilance against COVID-19, and the differences in consumption behavior of each age group reflect the degree of their vigilance. That is, services consumption by the younger generation has recovered rapidly, whereas that by seniors, who are strongly vigilant against COVID-19, saw a significant decline and has picked up at a slower pace.  In contrast, manufacturing and retail firms, which produce and sell goods, have been relatively less affected. Goods transactions worldwide have picked up at a comparatively faster pace (Chart 3). A decline in global trade activity has been small compared with at the time of Global Financial Crisis (GFC) and a rapid recovery has been observed. Under these circumstances, the level of Japan's exports has returned to that seen prior to the COVID-19 outbreak, and at a rapid pace. This has led to manufacturers' relatively steady production activity.  
 3  As I have explained thus far, the impact of the shock of COVID-19 is uneven and largely varies for attributes such as the industry and size of firms as well as consumers' ages. At the current phase in particular, this suggests the need to closely examine economic developments not only by looking at the aggregate or average values of data, but also through analyzing developments in different attributes of each economic entity.  Outlook for Economic Developments Now, let me move on to the outlook for Japan's economy. In the baseline scenario, it is projected that, with the impact of COVID-19 waning gradually, Japan's economy will follow an improving trend, albeit moderately, also supported by a pick-up in overseas economies (Chart 4). Compared with early spring, many countries have been making responses while striking a balance between preventive measures and economic activity. It is true that the pace of economic recovery is likely to remain only moderate with the continuing impact of COVID-19. However, it is also true that, taking advantage of the experiences since this spring, the level of economic activity has increased gradually, with society overall adapting to a "new lifestyle" while taking targeted preventive measures. As a baseline scenario, it is expected that these developments will continue.  That said, this outlook entails high uncertainties, and risks are skewed to the downside. Although recent positive news on vaccines is certainly encouraging, it is still likely to take time for them to become widely available. On the other hand, it is necessary to pay attention to the fact that the spread of COVID-19 has been continuing globally and that the number of confirmed cases has been resurging in Japan as well. In addition, there are uncertainties over whether, while the impact of COVID-19 remains, growth expectations will not decline substantially and financial system stability will be maintained. Thus, the Bank will continue to closely examine economic developments at home and abroad.  Recent Developments in and Outlook for Prices Next, let us look at price developments in Japan (Chart 5). The year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) excluding fresh food has been negative. This is attributable to temporary factors such as the past decline in crude oil prices and a discount on hotel charges through the "Go To Travel" campaign. However, even though a decrease 
 4  in demand due to the impact of COVID-19 has constrained inflation, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI has been slightly positive when excluding the effects of these temporary factors.  The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is likely to be negative for the time being. Thereafter, it is expected to turn positive and then increase gradually with the effects of temporary factors that push down prices dissipating and the economy improving (Chart 4). At present, the Bank judges that prices will not see an overall and sustained decline; in other words, the economy will not return to deflation. However, attention should also continue to be paid to price developments given that the pace of economic improvement is only moderate and uncertainties over the economic outlook are significant.  II. The Bank's Conduct of Monetary Policy Monetary Policy Conduct in Response to COVID-19 and Financial Developments So far, I have talked about developments in economic activity and prices. Now, I will explain the Bank's thinking behind the monetary policy conduct in response to COVID-19. To address the global shock of COVID-19, governments and central banks around the world have swiftly made policy responses on a large scale. Governments have implemented large-scale economic measures including income support and loan guarantees to firms and households. Central banks have conducted monetary easing measures, and their responses have two things in common. One is providing support for financing to firms and sole proprietors affected by COVID-19 so that they can sustain their businesses. The other is maintaining stability in financial markets in order to prevent a vicious cycle between turmoil in the markets and deterioration in the real economy.  In this regard, the Bank has conducted powerful monetary easing since March in response to COVID-19 through the following three measures (Chart 6). Specifically, the first is the Special Program to Support Financing in Response to the Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) to provide support mainly for corporate financing. The second is an ample and flexible provision of funds, mainly by purchasing Japanese government bonds (JGBs) and conducting the U.S. dollar funds-supplying operations, to ensure stability in financial 
 5  markets. The third is active purchases of exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs) to lower risk premia in asset markets.  The Bank's responses have had positive effects, coupled with the government's measures and active efforts by financial institutions (Chart 7). As for financial conditions, although firms' financial positions have been weak, the environment for external funding has remained accommodative. The year-on-year rate of change in the amount outstanding of bank lending has registered the highest increase in about 30 years on the back of banks' accommodative lending attitudes. That in the aggregate amount outstanding of CP and corporate bonds has been at a high level that exceeds 10 percent. Thus, the smooth functioning of financial intermediation has been ensured, and this is a big difference from the time of the GFC, when downward pressure from the financial side on the real economy intensified. In addition, global financial markets, which had been highly volatile, have regained stability earlier this time than in the case of the GFC due to large-scale responses made by governments and central banks around the world, including the Bank of Japan.  Extension of the Special Program to Support Financing in Response to the Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) However, economic activity and prices are projected to remain under downward pressure for a prolonged period due to the impact of COVID-19 (Chart 8). Given this situation, with a view to supporting the economy and thereby achieving the price stability target of 2 percent, the Bank decided at the last week's MPM upon the following two responses to be made respectively for the time being and from a somewhat long-term perspective.  The first one is the extension of the Special Program to Support Financing in Response to the Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19). With the economy improving at only a moderate pace, corporate financing is likely to remain under stress for the time being. Given these circumstances, the Bank decided to extend the duration of the Special Program until the end of September 2021, and will consider further extension if necessary. The Bank will continue to firmly support corporate financing.   
 6  Assessment for Further Effective and Sustainable Monetary Easing The second response is the conduct of an assessment for further effective and sustainable monetary easing with a view to achieving the price stability target of 2 percent. Its findings will be made public, likely at the March 2021 MPM.   The Bank has been pursuing large-scale monetary easing since 2013. In summer 2016, three years after its introduction, the Bank conducted a comprehensive assessment to examine its effects. The findings indicate that, under the large-scale monetary easing, financial conditions improved significantly, as seen in the correction of the past excessive appreciation of the yen and decline in stock prices, and that this led to improvement in corporate profits and economic activity. On this point, I would think you have recognized these developments through a significant improvement in the business environment compared with the past. On the other hand, findings with regard to prices reveal the following two points. First, although the economy, with the CPI being positive on the whole, is no longer in deflation in the sense of a sustained decline in prices, the price stability target of 2 percent has not been achieved. Second, people's mindset and behavior based on the assumption that wages and prices will not increase easily have been deeply entrenched under prolonged deflation, and it turns out that it will still take a long time for such mindset and behavior to change. In addition, the findings also make clear that monetary easing could have a cumulative negative impact on financial institutions' profits as well as on life insurance and pension funds, which in turn could adversely affect the functioning of financial intermediation.  As a policy response based on these findings of the comprehensive assessment, the Bank introduced "Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) with Yield Curve Control" in September 2016. Through this framework, it controls policy interest rates to appropriate levels while taking into consideration both the positive and side effects of monetary easing, thereby maintaining favorable economic and financial conditions -- that is, a favorable business environment for business managers -- created by large-scale monetary easing.  
 7  The upcoming assessment will be conducted with the findings of the comprehensive assessment in mind. "QQE with Yield Curve Control" has worked well for four years since its introduction to date, including the past 10 months during the COVID-19 pandemic. Thus, the Bank judges that there is no need to change its framework. Under this framework, it will assess whether the manner of operation and the various policy tools, including asset purchases, have had their intended effects. In pursuit of further effective and sustainable monetary easing toward achieving the price stability target of 2 percent, if there is anything more that can be done, the Bank will do so.  The key is "effective" and "sustainable" monetary easing. Since monetary easing inevitably will be prolonged due to the impact of COVID-19, the Bank will devise ways to continue conducting "QQE with Yield Curve Control." That said, simply maintaining it for a prolonged period is not enough. If the conduct becomes too rigid, it will not work appropriately. As evidenced by the sudden occurrence of the current shock of COVID-19, various shocks may happen in the future. Thus, it is necessary to be nimble in making effective responses when needed to counter possible changes in economic activity and prices, as well as financial conditions.  This should be a matter of course for business managers like you all, but any measures incur costs, as with monetary policy measures. Prolonged low interest rates have a negative impact on financial institutions' profits, and purchases of various assets such as JGBs and ETFs affect the market functioning. Such costs or side effects need to be minimized. That said, the management goals cannot be achieved only by curbing costs. I believe business management is about producing significant positive effects at low costs. Anything that is unnecessary and inefficient should be avoided, but the focus of our assessment is not on lowering costs or mitigating side effects. Instead, the Bank will adopt a forward-looking perspective of how to achieve stability in economic activity and prices by pursuing further effective monetary easing while mitigating side effects.  
 8  III. Strengthening Japan's Economic Growth Potential with an Eye on the Post-COVID-19 Era The COVID-19 pandemic is still affecting the global economy on an enormous scale, and many people in Japan have been making strenuous efforts toward it. Above all, it is necessary to simultaneously contain the spread of COVID-19 and improve economic activity in order to overcome the current crisis. At the same time, given the current situation and also looking ahead to the time when we overcome the crisis -- that is, the post-COVID-19 era -- it is important to focus on challenges regarding Japan's economy as a whole and firmly push forward with addressing them while making good use of insights gained from this experience.   Looking at the past experiences of bursting of bubbles and financial crises, a major shock is often followed by a period of prolonged low growth (Chart 9). Examples include Japan in the aftermath of the bursting of the bubble economy and the financial crisis of the second half of the 1990s, as well as developed economies overall following the GFC. What happened with Japan's economy, which suffered from deflation, clearly illustrates that the social costs of addressing prolonged low growth ex post are high. Based on these experiences, governments and central banks around the world have made every effort to prevent as much as possible the COVID-19 shock from creating "scarring effects," which are long-lasting aftereffects on the economy.  Generally speaking, the growth potential of an economy is determined by three factors: labor input, capital input, and total factor productivity, which represents technological progress. The reasons for prolonged low growth in the wake of a major shock are often divided into the following three causes: (1) hysteresis effects, where, for example, an increase in unemployment at the time of the shock affects labor input during the recovery period; (2) stagnation of capital input due to constraints on business fixed investment; and (3) stagnation of technological progress. It is important to address these issues in order to get the economy back on a steady growth path once the impact of COVID-19 subsides. I would like to talk about these three issues, which I believe will be crucial from a medium- to long-term perspective.  
 9  Labor Input: Maintaining and Improving Workers' Skills The first issue is labor input. The hysteresis effects of economic crises with regard to labor input refer to the fact that those who lost their jobs due to employment adjustments face a decline in their skills or an exit from the labor market, which consequently has effects on subsequent labor input. While this problem has often been highlighted in Europe and the United States, it also warrants attention in Japan, as evidenced by the fact that the so-called employment ice age generation, which first became an issue nearly two decades ago, is still a problem today. In order not to make the issue of hysteresis effects with regard to labor input worse, it is important to contain the number of those unemployed as much as possible in the event of a shock. In response to the current shock, many countries have provided support for retaining employees and sustaining businesses, and this also is effective in terms of addressing the issue regarding hysteresis effects of labor input. Japan, too, has not experienced a significant increase in unemployment or bankruptcies due to the efforts made by firms and financial institutions together with the government's employment adjustment subsidies and subsidies for sustaining businesses, as well as the government's and the Bank's support for financing (Chart 10).  However, more will need to be done in the longer run in terms of labor input. That is, firms need to upgrade the skills of their employees so that they will be able to adapt to structural changes in the economy. Since there are major changes in the business environment as a result of the pandemic, firms will not be able to sustain adequate competitiveness by simply maintaining their workers' skills. Even before the outbreak of COVID-19, it has been often the case that the shortage of relevant human resources has constrained the expansion of businesses. With the ongoing efforts toward digitalization, the shortage of human resources for information technology is a pressing issue. In order to respond boldly to the major changes, firms have made efforts not only to improve workers' skills through in-house training but also to acquire new skills through the exchange of human resources with other industries. It is important for firms to further step up efforts that they already have made to improve their workers' skills in order to adapt to structural changes.  
 10  Capital Input: Capital Stock Accumulation through Business Fixed Investment The next issue is capital input. One of the reasons for prolonged low growth after a major crisis is that the accumulation of the necessary capital stock is hampered. That is, in the aftermath of a crisis in which corporate profits deteriorate, economic uncertainties increase, and the funding environment worsens, business fixed investment will be constrained excessively, and firms' continuing cautious stance will lead to prolonged stagnation in capital accumulation.   Let us look at the past business fixed investment stance of firms in Japan (Chart 11). Following the bursting of the bubble economy, they remained reluctant to make fixed investment for a long period under prolonged deflation. However, as I mentioned at this meeting last year, firms surely had become more active with their fixed investment in recent years, mainly on the back of high levels of profits. During this situation, early this year, we were hit by the shock of COVID-19. It is true that the high levels of savings that remained on hand even after making active investment have mitigated the impact of the shock. However, the important thing is that being excessively cautious with investment based on this experience will negatively affect future competitiveness. I think that firms are well aware of this point. Many are saying that, despite the shock, they will continue to make necessary investment, given that they significantly constrained fixed investment after the GFC and subsequently lost their competitiveness. When looking ahead to the post-COVID-19 era as well, I think it is important not to interrupt the positive trend seen before the outbreak, which was to invest aggressively for the future.  Technological Progress: Continued Investment for Growth Technological progress is also important (Chart 12). There are many examples like the GFC where, in the aftermath of a crisis, technological progress stagnated and productivity growth in the economy as a whole remained weak accordingly. One of the reasons is the lack of research and development (R&D) investment. When firms become reluctant to make such investment, innovation is less likely to happen because the introduction of advanced technologies is delayed. Thus, what is necessary for technological progress is to make investment for growth from a medium- to long-term perspective and make innovative efforts based on such investment. In this regard, it is a noteworthy sign that, in spite of the 
 11  current severe economic environment, moves toward further digitalization have been seen at various levels of our country, including firms. In fact, software investment has remained steady compared with overall business fixed investment. It is very encouraging to see that firms have maintained their stance of creating innovation through such investment for growth.  Thus far, I have explained the key points to bring Japan's economy back on a sustainable growth path from a medium- to long-term perspective based on labor input, capital input, and technological progress. Of course, no one knows at this point what the so-called new normal economy will look like once the pandemic has subsided. However, as I talked about at this meeting in the past, when facing a significant change, firms can achieve substantial growth by being one step ahead and turning such change into opportunity. Progress in efforts to address environmental issues with a view to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) is one such example. I believe that many firms consider that addressing such issues will not only meet social demands but will also enhance their competitiveness in the social setting to come. I hope that firms will boldly take on the various challenges with a view to raising their future growth potential.  Conclusion Today, I talked about developments in Japan's economy, its outlook, the Bank's response to COVID-19, as well as the efforts that are required when also looking ahead to the post-COVID-19 era. The pandemic has reminded us of the importance of social interaction. While people have taken advantage of using virtual tools to continue their daily communication, I believe that the craving for everyday uncomplicated, face-to-face interaction has been the driving force for such actions as the development of vaccines. Such strong motivation can be a catalyst for great change. The challenge for us is how society as a whole can make the most of the harsh experience of COVID-19.  As I have mentioned today, if we can turn economic changes into opportunities, I believe that Japan's economy will not stagnate post-pandemic, but instead will leap forward. To make this happen, active efforts by the private sector are essential. Of course, the public 
 12  sector will firmly support its efforts. The Bank will continue to provide accommodative financial conditions in order to strongly support such transformative moves.  Lastly, I would like to conclude my speech today by wishing you all a wonderful year ahead.  Thank you for your attention. 
December 24, 2020KURODAHaruhikoGovernor of the Bank of JapanResponse to COVID-19 andMedium-to Long-Term Challenges for Japan's Economy:With an Eye on the Post-COVID-19 EraSpeech at the Meeting of Councillors of Nippon Keidanren (Japan Business Federation) in TokyoIntroductionI.Economic and Price Developments during the COVID-19 Era and Their OutlookII.The Bank's Conduct of Monetary PolicyIII.Strengthening Japan's Economic Growth Potential with an Eye on the Post-COVID-19 EraConclusion
-15-10-5051015ChinaJapanUnited StatesEuro areaJan.-Mar.Apr.-JuneJuly-Sept.s.a.,q/q % chg.0.00.51.01.52.02.50510152025Jan.Mar.May.Jul.Sep.Nov.United States (left scale)Europe (left scale)India, Brazil, Russia (left scale)China (right scale)Japan(right scale)20July        Sept.10 thous., weekly average10 thous., weekly averageCOVID-19Daily Confirmed New CasesI. Economic and Price Developments during the COVID-19 Era and Their OutlookMajor Economies′ Real GDP (2020)Chart11Sources: Haver; OECD.020406080100120Jan.Apr.Jul.Oct.Jan.Apr.Jul.Oct.ManufacturingRetail tradeEating and drinking places, takeout and delivery servicesServices for amusement andhobbiesAccomodationsCY 2019 = 1001920JulyJuly8085909510010518/Q123419/Q123420/Q123GoodsServicesCY 2019 =100Note: In the left-hand chart, figures for manufacturing are the "Indices of Industrial Production"and those for other sectorsare the "Indices of Tertiary Industry Activity."Sources: Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry;Cabinet Office.Chart22I. Economic and Price Developments during the COVID-19 Era and Their OutlookImpact on Economic ActivityEconomic Activity by SectorHousehold Consumption
5060708090100110-12-9-6-303691215182124COVID-19GFCmonthsCOVID-19: Jan. 2020 = 100GFC:Aug. 2008 = 1005060708090100110-12-9-6-303691215182124COVID-19GFCCOVID-19: Jan. 2020 = 100GFC:Aug. 2008 = 100monthsSources: CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis; Bank of Japan; Ministry of Finance.Chart33I. Economic and Price Developments during the COVID-19 Era and Their OutlookTrade Activity of GoodsWorld Trade VolumeJapan's Exportsof Goods(Real Exports)The Bank's Forecasts for Economic Activity and Prices(October 2020 Outlook Report)Notes: 1. These figures show the forecasts of the majority of the Policy Board members and those in brackets indicate the medians. The forecasts are constructed as follows: each Policy Boardmember's forecast takes the form of a point estimate --namely, the figure to which she or he attaches the highest probability of realization. These forecasts are then shown as a range, with the highest figure and the lowest figure excluded. 2. The direct effects of the October 2019 consumption tax hike on the CPI for fiscal 2020 are estimated to be 0.5 percentage point. In addition, based on a specific assumption, the direct effects of policies concerning the provision of free education on the CPI for fiscal 2020 are estimated tobe around minus 0.4 percentage point. The direct effects of the "Go To Travel" campaign on the CPI are estimated to be minus 0.2 percentage point for fiscal 2020 and 0.2 percentage point for fiscal 2021.Source: Bank of Japan.Chart44I. Economic and Price Developments during the COVID-19 Era and Their Outlooky/y %chg.Real GDPCPI(all items less fresh food)Fiscal 2020-5.6 to -5.3[-5.5]-0.7to -0.5[-0.6]ForecastsmadeinJuly2020-5.7to -4.5[-4.7]-0.6to -0.4[-0.5]Fiscal 2021+3.0to +3.8[+3.6]+0.2to +0.6[+0.4]ForecastsmadeinJuly2020+3.0to +4.0[+3.3]+0.2to +0.5[+0.3]Fiscal 2022+1.5to +1.8[+1.6]+0.4to +0.7[+0.7]ForecastsmadeinJuly2020+1.3to +1.6[+1.5]+0.5to +0.8[+0.7]
-2-10123414151617181920Effects of the "Go To Travel" campaignEffects of the consumption tax hikes and free education policiesEnergyItems other than energyCPI (less fresh food)y/y % chg.CYNotes: 1. Energy consists of petroleum products, electricity, and gas, manufactured & piped.2. Figures for the "effects of the consumption tax hikes and free education policies" from April 2020 onward are based on staff estimations and include the effects of measures such as free higher education introduced in April 2020.Source: Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications.Chart55I. Economic and Price Developments during the COVID-19 Era and Their OutlookConsumer PricesSupporting Corporate FinancingSpecial Program to Support Financing in Response to COVID-19Purchases of CP and corporate bonds: amount outstanding of about 20 tril. yen at maximum(previous amount outstanding of about 5 tril. yen)Special Funds-Supplying Operations to Facilitate Financing in Response to COVID-19Stabilizing Financial MarketsActive Purchases of ETFs and J-REITsETFs: annual pace of about 6 tril. yen→ annual pace with the upper limit of about 12 tril. yen (for the time being)J-REITs: annual pace of about 90 bil. yen→ annual pace with the upper limit of about 180 bil. yen (for the time being)Ample and Flexible Provision of Yen and Foreign Currency FundsFurther active purchases of JGBs and T-BillsEnhancement of the U.S. Dollar Funds-Supplying OperationsChart66II. The Bank's Conduct of Monetary PolicyThe Bank's Measures in Response to COVID-19
-40-30-20-100102030400507091113151719Large firmsSmall and medium-sized firmsDI ("accomodative" -"severe"),% pointsCY"accomodative""severe"-8-404812160507091113151719Lending by domestic commercial banksCP and corporate bondsy/y % chg.CYChart77Notes: 1. In the left-hand chart, figures are for all industries.2. In the right-hand chart, figures for lending by domestic commercial banks are monthly averages. Figures for CP and corporate bonds are those at the end of the period. Lending bydomestic commercial banks includes loans to firms, individuals, and local governments. Sources: Bank of Japan; Japan Securities Depository Center; Japan Securities Dealers Association; I-N Information Systems.Financial ConditionsLending Attitudes of Financial Institutionsas Perceived by FirmsAmount Outstanding of Bank Lending, CP, and Corporate BondsII. The Bank's Conduct of Monetary PolicyKey Points of Decisions Made at the December MPMAssessment for Further Effective and Sustainable Monetary Easingto Achieve the Price Stability Target of 2%Extension of the Special Program to Support Financingin Response to the Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19)Extension by 6 months: end-March 2021 → end-September 2021* Further extension will be considered if necessary.Adjustments to the Special ProgramPurchases of CP and corporate bonds: combine the maximum amount of additional purchasesfor each asset, making a total of 15 tril. yenSpecial Operations to facilitate financing: remove the upper limit of 100 bil. yen on funds provided to each eligible counterparty against loans that financial institutions make on their ownTheBankjudges that there is no need to change the frameworkof "QQE with Yield Curve Control."The Bank will assess various measures under this framework and make public its findings, likely at the March 2021 MPM.Economic activity and prices have remained under prolonged downward pressure due to the impact of COVID-19.In this situation, there is a need to support the economy and thereby achieve the price stability target of 2%.Chart88II. The Bank's Conduct of Monetary Policy
406080100120140858789919395Real GDPTrend line for 5 yearsprior to the crisisCYCY 1990 = 100708090100110120020406081012Real GDPTrend line for 5 yearsprior to the crisisCYCY 2007 = 100708090100110120929496980002Real GDPTrend line for 5 yearsprior to the crisisCYCY 1997 = 100Japan(After the Financial Crisisin the 1990s )Advanced Economies(After the GFC)Source: IMF.Chart99Low Growth After the CrisesJapan(After the Bubble Economy)III. Strengthening Japan's Economic Growth Potential with an Eye on the Post-COVID-19 Era4006008001,0001,2001,4001,6000608101214161820CYcases234560608101214161820CYs.a.,%Note: In the right-hand chart, figures show 6-month backward moving averages.Sources: Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications; Tokyo Shoko Research Ltd.Chart1010Labor Input: Avoiding Hysteresis EffectsUnemployment RateNumber of Corporate BankruptciesIII. Strengthening Japan's Economic Growth Potential with an Eye on the Post-COVID-19 Era
4060801001200306090120858891949700030609121518Current profits (left scale)Business fixed investment (right scale)FYs.a.,ann., tril. yens.a.,ann., tril. yen10152025303540858891949700030609121518Investment / (operating cash flows +personnel expenses)%FYChart1111Notes: 1. In the left-hand chart, figures for current profits are based on the "Financial Statements Statistics of Corporations by Industry, Quarterly." Excluding "finance and insurance." Figures from 2009/Q2 onward exclude "pure holding companies." 2. In the right-hand chart, operating cash flows = net income -dividends + depreciation expenses + Δprovisions -Δinventories -Δtrade credits -Δnet amount of other current assets. Investment includes land purchasing expenses and excludes software and R&D investment.Sources: Cabinet Office; Ministry of Finance.Capital Input: Avoiding Stagnation of Business Fixed InvestmentCorporate Profits and Business Fixed InvestmentInvestment-Cash Flow RatioIII. Strengthening Japan's Economic Growth Potential with an Eye on the Post-COVID-19 Era-2-10123456United StatesUnitedKingdomGermanyJapanBeforethe GFCAfterthe GFCy/y % chg.0.00.20.40.60.81.01.2United StatesUnitedKingdomGermanyJapanBeforethe GFCAfterthe GFCy/y % chg.Notes: 1. In the left-hand chart, figures are averages of year-on-year changes for 7 years before and after the GFC. 2. In the right-hand chart, figures are averages of year-on-year changes for 3 years before and after the GFC.Sources: EU KLEMS; OECD.Chart1212Technological Progress: Encouraging Investment for GrowthStagnation of Total Factor ProductivityAfter the CrisisResearch and Development InvestmentIII. Strengthening Japan's Economic Growth Potential with an Eye on the Post-COVID-19 Era
Guo Shuqing: Remarks - Annual Conference of Financial StreetForum 2020Remarks by Mr Guo Shuqing, Party Secretary and Deputy Governor of the People's Bank ofChina and CBIRC Chairman, at the Annual Conference of Financial Street Forum 2020, 27October 2020.*   *   *Mayor Chen Jining, Governor Yi Gang, President He Ping, Chairman Yi Huiman,Administrator Pan Gongsheng, ladies and gentlemen, dear friends:It is a great pleasure to attend the 2020 Annual Conference of Financial Street Forum. First, Iwould like to extend warm congratulations on the convening of this year’s forum, and wish it acomplete success. Facing the profound changes in our internal and external environments,China’s financial sector has unswervingly followed the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought onSocialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, deepened reforms on all fronts, strictlyheld the bottom line of risk prevention, served the real economy, and contributed to high-qualitydevelopment. We will work in accordance with the requirements laid out just now by VicePremier Liu He in his remarks, and reshape the new edges for financial development in thecreation of a new development pattern. Here I would like to share my opinions on four aspects.I. We will comprehensively enhance the inclusiveness of financeThe nature of socialism with Chinese characteristics determines that our financial sector mustcater to hundreds of millions of people in the country. In a capitalist society, finance is animportant cause of polarization. Amid the COVID-19 pandemic, the gap between the rich and thepoor in some countries is widening, which is largely attributed to the considerable divergence oftheir financial markets from the real economy. For instance, the stock market in some countryhas witnessed exceptional boom, as reflected by the fact that since the beginning of this year,the increased market cap of five large companies has accounted for over 80 percent of the totalrises in its market. Here in China, however, we shall remain even more committed to the newdevelopment philosophy, and better leverage the role of finance in adjusting industrial structure,optimizing income distribution and improving social welfare.In China, 99 percent of the population now has access to basic financial services, with bankingoutlets covering 96.6 percent of towns. Each Chinese resident has 8.06 bank accounts and 6.01bank cards on average, and the personal settlement accounts opened in rural areas take up 40percent of the total. Two-thirds of micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs), as wellas tens of millions of self-employed businesses and ordinary rural households can obtain bankloans. Government-funded or government-subsidized medical and health insurances havebenefited all urban and rural residents. These are extraordinary achievements even in the globalcontext. However, that’s not enough. Given that the contradiction between the unbalanced andinadequate financial supply and the multilevel and diverse financial demand remains relativelysalient, much work remains to be done to achieve the goal of inclusiveness in the finance sector.We must steadfastly advance the supply-side structural reform of the financial sector. To bespecific, we should cultivate small and medium-sized financial institutions, while developing largeand super-large financial enterprises. In the meantime, we should also foster both specializedprofessional institutions and one-stop institutions with a comprehensive business scope.Financial entities of different types should remain committed to their roles, learn from eachother’s strengths to offset their own weaknesses, and benignly compete and cooperate witheach other, in a bid to build together a prosperous financial sector. All financial institutions shouldspeed up digital transformation, which is an inevitable way to improve their ability to serve thepublic. 1 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
Deepening the internal governance reform of financial institutions remains an imperative task. Inthis regard, we must face up to the hidden risks and violations of laws and regulations that havebeen exposed, resolutely punish corrupt officials, and spare no efforts to recover the losses ofthe country and the people. Financial institutions of all sizes, including city commercial banks,rural credit cooperatives, trust companies and leasing companies, must establish and improvethe modern corporate system. In this process, the key is to strengthen the corporate governancestructure, and strictly select senior executives who are loyal, professional,clean and pragmatic.Supervision and regulation should be further strengthened and improved, so as to channelfinancial resources to weak areas in economic and social development. We should adopt acustomer-centered mindset, strive to realize the career aspirations of employees, take root inurban and rural communities, and actively fulfill social responsibilities. We should improve theavailability of financial services and reduce service costs through technological empowerment,so that people can have equal and even access to financial resources and enjoy high-qualityfinancial services. The accomplishment of these goals essentially conforms to the need of valuecreation for equity investors.Financial institutions must tap their professional advantages, enhance wealth managementservices, increase people’s property income, and maintain and increase the value of people’swealth in the long run. In addition, financial institutions should also prevent risk spillovers,maintain the stability of the financial market, and improve social welfare. In terms of disasterprevention and relief, green development and climate change, financial institutions should alsoact proactively and play an exemplary role.II. We will make efforts to promote the sound development of commercial old-age insurance, the third pillar of China’s three-pillar old-age insurance systemChina has initially established a three-pillar pension system underpinned by basic old-age insurance, enterprise (occupational) annuity and personal commercial old-age insurance.The first pillar has covered nearly one billion urban and rural residents. However, the secondpillar only accounts for a small share of the total, and the third pillar has remained in its initialstage for a long period. Compared with many other countries, the third pillar in Chinadeveloped at a relatively slow pace and represented a minuscule share, with little support for theelderly care. As China’s population aging picks up pace, it is imperative to develop the third pillar.To that end, the financial sector can and should play an important role.By giving full play to the advantages of finance and vigorously developing the third pillar for theelderly care, we can effectively alleviate the pressure on China’s expenditure on pensioninsurance and meet people’s diverse needs for elderly care. At the same time, we can alsopool long-term stable funds together, explore a cross-cycle investment model, and make thethird pillar a major driver for long-term and value investing in the capital market, so as tofundamentally promote the sound development of the capital market and satisfy the funding needof infrastructure construction and technological innovation. At present, the total financial assets ofChinese residents have reached RMB160 trillion, of which more than RMB90 trillion is bankdeposits mostly with maturities of less than one year. The financial assets that can be convertedinto life-long pension resources are of a massive size, thus demonstrating prominentadvantages.In recent years, together with relevant ministries and commissions and financial enterprises, thePBC has conducted extensive research on the reform and development of old-age finance, andworked out an overarching plan for the next step. The Central Committee of the CommunistParty of China (CPC) and the State Council have attached great importance to this issue, andthe Financial Stability and Development Committee (FSDC) of the State Council has madespecial arrangements that require active, prudent and orderly progress achieved in a step-by-step manner. The overarching plan adopts a two-pronged approach. On the one hand, 2 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
focusing on the existing business rules by unifying the standards for old-age finance productsand removing products which do not live up to their names. On the other hand, carrying out pilotprograms of business innovation and vigorously developing professional old-age products thatcan provide actual elderly care, such as old-age deposits, old-age wealth management andfunds, dedicated old-age insurance, commercial pensions, etc. We will select out financialinstitutions and franchised institutions which have more favorable conditions to participate in theendeavors first, firmly bear in mind China’s realities, learn the experiences, both positive andnegative, of other countries, and blaze a trail for the reform and development of old-age finance.III. We will unswervingly push forward the opening-up of the financial service sectorOpening-up and cooperation are the only way to financial prosperity and development. In anenclosed environment, it is impossible to foster financial institutions or markets which arecompetitive in a real sense. Promoting reform and development with opening-up is an importantlesson learned from our experience in the past 40-plus years of reform and opening-up. In hiskey remarks delivered at the Celebration of the 40th Anniversary of the Establishment of theShenzhen Special Economic Zone, General Secretary Xi Jinping made a profound point that thenew development pattern was not an enclosed domestic cycle, but an open, dual-cycle patternwith both domestic and international cycles. Similarly, it is amid the twists and turns in an openenvironment that China’s financial system has become more international and resilient andachieved today’s historic achievements. China has established and developed the world’s largestcredit market, and the world’s second largest stock market, bond market and insurance market.Large state-owned commercial banks are leading the world or even outperforming global peersin productivity, management costs, inclusive finance, digitized operations, etc. Large insurancecompanies are also in the front ranks of the world in terms of growth rate, development potentialand market valuation.Since the 19th CPC National Congress, under the strong leadership of the CPC CentralCommittee and the direct guidance of the FSDC of the State Council, more than 50 opening-upmeasures have been introduced in the financial sector, including significantly easing foreignequity restrictions, expanding business scope, and exploring new areas for cooperation betweenChinese and foreign financial markets. So far, these policies have gradually been implementedand delivered results, and produced a batch of demonstrative cases. The first wholly foreign-owned insurance holding company, the first wholly foreign-owned life insurance company, andthe first foreign-controlled wealth management company were successively approved forestablishment. The strides of opening-up in the financial sector have not been stopped for amoment, even amid the worst situations of the COVID-19 pandemic.In the next step, while resolutely safeguarding China’s financial security and stability, we willunswervingly expand opening-up in the financial service sector, continuously optimizeinstitutional arrangements for the financial market, deepen international economic and financialcooperation, and steadily improve the competitiveness of the financial system while furtheropening up. We welcome foreign institutions with sound market reputation and credit records,especially those with specialties and expertise in risk control, pension management, consumerfinance, wealth management and health insurance, to enter China and vitalize the market. Wealso encourage Chinese financial institutions to “go global” and do business in host countries inaccordance with local laws and regulations.IV. We will give full play to the immense role of technological advancement in improvingfinancial efficiencyFinance and technology have always been mutually reinforcing each other and developingtogether. All the major technological revolutions in the history significantly drove the financialsector forward. The introduction of telegraph enabled financial services to be offered beyond timeand spatial limits. The application of computers significantly enhanced the capacity of storing 3 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
financial data and improved the efficiency of financial services. Nowadays, the achievements oftechnological revolution, represented by the Internet, big data and block-chain, have been widelyapplied in the financial sector. Meanwhile, finance has also supported and boosted thedevelopment of tech companies through credit and capital markets. That the financial sector isamong the first to widely apply technological achievements has been an important driving forcefor technological progress. Some banks and insurance companies have already set upinfluential tech companies.Fintech application in China has been world-leading in many aspects. Mobile payment, electronicclearing, online banking and digital credit have been developing rapidly. So far, transactionsconducted without visiting bank outlets have accounted for nearly 90 percent of the total in thebanking industry. Micro and small businesses (MSBs) used to wait for 20 to 30 days for loanapproval, while with the support of technological platforms, such process has been reduced toseconds. Some Internet tech companies are actively exploring financial businesses, and havemade remarkable achievements.We will continuously support Fintech development, optimize customer experience and improveservice efficiency. We will also closely follow and assess the trend of the influence of thetechnological revolution on the financial sector, and make effective forward-lookingarrangements. On the aspect of regulation, technology application will be strengthened in a bid toimprove regulatory efficiency. Undoubtedly, Fintech development has also raised some newproblems, which calls for efforts to pay high attention to risks and challenges such as cybersecurity, data privacy and oligopoly, so as to ensure market fairness and financial stability.Beijing has a unique position as the capital city. The financial sector must be fully committed tosupporting the functional development of the “four centers” (the cultural, political, internationalexchange, and science and technology innovation centers), as well as the construction of anational integrated demonstration zone for greater openness in the service sector. We will alsosupport Beijing in its accelerated construction of the pilot free trade zone and in the developmentof Beijing as a platform of high-level opening-up for the coordinated development of the Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei region.Here is the end of my speech. Thank you!  4 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
Esala Masitabua: Designing Inclusive Green Finance policies andinitiativesClosing remarks by Mr Esala Masitabua, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at theRBF-AFI Virtual Joint Learning Programme on Inclusive Green Finance Implementation, 21October 2020.*   *   *SalutationsAFI ColleaguesParticipants, SpeakersLadies and GentlemenIntroductory CommentsNi sa bula vinaka and warm greetings from the Reserve Bank of Fiji (RBF).It gives me great pleasure to deliver the closing remarks for this virtual Joint LearningProgramme (JLP) on Inclusive Green Finance Implementation, that we are proudly co-hostingwith AFI.As each of you would have learnt over the last few days, Inclusive Green Finance (IGF) is a newand evolving policy area. It is an honour for the RBF and our fellow Fijian stakeholders to not onlyshare our experiences with you, but also listen to and learn from the progress of our fellow AFImembers and the various technical personnel that have shared their expertise over the pastthree days.As you have heard, dealing with climate change is an issue close to our hearts here in Fiji andthe Pacific.While much of the world’s attention is firmly fixed on responding to the COVID-19 pandemic andits economic implications, history tells us that pandemics will pass. The looming climate crisishowever has not abated and still firmly remains a threat to decades of development andprogress.As central bankers and policy makers responsible for ensuring both financial andmacroeconomic stability, we have an obligation to integrate climate change into our businessand policy frameworks. I think there is a growing consensus on this, globally. As financialregulators specifically, our opportunity is to steer the financial sector towards serving the needsof the people in mitigating the contributors towards climate change and building long-termresilience.We acknowledge that we will not be able to do this alone and that public and private partnershipswill need to be forged in order to ensure that climate financing needs are met.  In this regard, weare grateful to AFI for the opportunity to co-host this JLP in order to interact with countries thathave made great strides in developing frameworks conducive to enhancing Inclusive GreenFinance.Designing IGF Policies and InitiativesAt the beginning of this virtual JLP, we heard inspiring remarks from Governor Ali and Dr Hannigthat laid the foundation for the sessions that ensued. Following this, we learnt that while we havea comprehensive 4P IGF framework to guide our policy initiatives, we recognise that eachcountry has its own set of implementation challenges and that the transition towards greening the 1 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
financial sector will not happen overnight.Additionally, climate financing is not cheap. Realistically, we cannot expect Government to bearthis cost alone. As regulators, we therefore have an important role to play in ensuring multi-stakeholder collaboration and securing private sector support towards bridging this financing gap.We must also align our green finance strategies with national sustainable finance priorities andencourage the inclusion of climate disaster vulnerable groups including our women and ourmicro and small businesses. Leveraging FinTech presents a cost-efficient means of addressingfrictions and enhancing channels for financing IGF projects. Furthermore, undertakingcomprehensive capacity building and awareness is required to educate our stakeholders on theIGF agenda and build support towards implementing green finance policies.As a last word on developing initiatives, I would like to share a sentiment recently shared at aforum of banks and regulators discussing climate risks: We need to guard against the pursuitof perfection over results. There is balancing required between being exactly wrong versusbeing useful and directionally correct. For this reason, we should be prepared to trial and error aswe develop approaches.Integration into Financial Inclusion and National level strategiesSimilar to other countries that are experiencing the unprecedented impacts of climate changeand disaster risks, Fiji has made considerable progress in ensuring that its climate response iswell aligned with national and international commitments.  This, includes establishing a legalframework for planning, implementing, and monitoring Fiji’s national climate change responseand its commitments under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change(UNFCCC). Fiji’s Draft Climate Change Bill aims to prompt innovation and foster greatercollaboration between stakeholders (private sector, civil society, academia, governmentagencies). The outturn is anticipated to enhance greater confidence amongst international anddomestic investors, thereby boosting an enabling environment for integrated public-privatefinancing, investments, and decision-making.Another key consideration is factoring Gender into the development of green finance initiatives aswe recognise that women are amongst the most vulnerable and most affected by climatedisaster events. The importance of undertaking a bottom-up approach to consultations cannot beunderstated and we need greater involvement of our target audiences in policy development. It istherefore important that we incorporate women’s input and viewpoints early in the planning anddesign stages to improve the effectiveness of IGF products and services.As you would have learned over the last few days, in Fiji we are doing this at the data collectionstage through our 2 demand side survey, with a view to include an inclusive gender focus inour next National Financial Inclusion Strategy (NFIS). The Inclusive Green Finance agendarequires coordinated effort to make real progress and we are glad that through joint learningprogrammes such as this, under AFI’s peer learning network, our combined experiences can beshared to inform our efforts towards building resilience for our vulnerable communities.ConclusionI must conclude by once again thanking AFI for the opportunity to co-host this event and wish toacknowledge the efforts of both our AFI and RBF teams that worked tirelessly behind the scenesto make this virtual JLP possible. I also extend our sincere appreciation to our distinguishedspeakers, moderators and panellists for sharing their invaluable knowledge and experiences withus.Finally, to you our participants, we greatly appreciate your active participation over the last threedays.  I hope that you have all had an enjoyable and insightful learning experience and will takeaway relevant topics and valuable learnings to inspire and advance your respective institutionsnd 2 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
Inclusive Green Finance journeys.Vinaka vakalevu, ni sa moce and good evening from us in Fiji, and we look forward to connectingwith you all at the next AFI event. 3 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
Vitas Vasiliauskas: Welcome speech - Bank of Lithuania Real EstateConferenceWelcome speech by Mr Vitas Vasiliauskas, Chairman of the Board of the Bank of Lithuania, atthe virtual Bank of Lithuania Real Estate Conference, 24 November 2020.*   *   *Check against deliveryGood morning, dear real estate experts, conference attendees, dear colleagues,I am happy to welcome all of you at the eighth Annual Bank of Lithuania Real Estate Conference.Throughout its history, our Real Estate Conference has been held at various venues. This year –not exactly by choice – we are meeting virtually for the first time ever. I must admit – this time weare acting in a pro-cyclical manner. The Bank of Lithuania was able to save money by not havingto rent a separate physical space for the conference. However, this also means, of course, thatthe commercial real estate market and, perhaps, some of the conference participants orattendees have lost some of their income.Therefore, the pandemic has inevitably in one way or another affected everyone and everything,including the foundations of the Lithuanian real estate market. For instance, we have observed aslowdown in the growth of house prices after the previous lockdown. Expectations of the realestate industry have also taken a turn for the worse: our surveys show that the majority ofcommercial banks have started to expect a fall in real estate prices, particularly in the segment ofcommercial real estate.However, the predictions of a looming market crash have not come true. On the contrary – thehousing market has gotten over the initial scare and recovered back to the new highs. Towardsautumn, new house sales already exceeded the average rate of several previous years. Andtoday, we hear more voices discussing new record numbers of transactions in the housingmarket.What were the reasons behind the resilience of the housing market? We do have certainanswers, but they are not yet complete and, probably, not definitive. I am therefore eagerlylooking forward to today’s discussions and, in order to kick-start them, I will provide severalpossible explanations.First, I would like to mention positive demographic changes, particularly in Vilnius – our capitalcity. In 2019, we still had doubts as to whether the growth of Lithuania’s population was a one-offphenomenon. This year, however, it has become apparent: the country’s population is growingfor the second consecutive year, and this trend is likely to continue, which is in turn a substantialimpetus for the housing market growth.Moreover, Vilnius continues to witness a rapid expansion of financial service providers, IT andfinancial technology enterprises, as well as an increase in the number of relatively high-incomebuyers and tenants who require more high-quality housing. Robust demand has lifted the capitalcity’s housing market to its current highs and led to an increasing office space supply.Another reason would be a record-high housing affordability. Let’s take a simple example: thisyear, a typical household can acquire a mid-sized apartment in Lithuania for its three years’wage. So let’s compare: last year, the average household had to work one and a half monthslonger to purchase such property, while five years ago – ten months longer. Of course, it takesmore years in Vilnius. However, the general trend is obvious: wage growth continues to outpacehouse prices, while credit terms remain favourable. This is determined, among other things, by 1 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
the decisive response to the COVID-19 crisis from the Eurosystem, which the Bank of Lithuaniais part of: timely decisions on monetary policy stimulus measures imply that interest rates areset to remain low for quite a long time to come.Dear colleagues,despite the pandemic, the Bank of Lithuania experts have not changed their housing marketassessment: even though the level of activity in this segment is still historically high, its currentsituation remains sustainable.What is the basis for such an assessment?First, as I have already mentioned, housing remains affordable.Second, the Bank of Lithuania ensures sustainability of the market and financial institutionsthrough its macroprudential policy instruments. The Responsible Lending Regulations crackdown on irresponsible behaviour of homebuyers and lenders, help avoid unfounded expectationsand offer a real reason to believe “that this time everything will actually be different”. Indeed, theproportion of mortgaged house purchases is now much smaller than before the onset of theglobal financial crisis, whereas the growth of housing loans remains much more balanced withthe development of the domestic economy.Furthermore, we are closely monitoring not only what is happening nationwide, but also on thelevel of individual cities or regions. If regional housing market imbalances emerge, we will nothesitate to take additional steps in implementing the Bank of Lithuania’s macroprudentialmandate. For example, if necessary, we may adjust the application of the Responsible LendingRegulations for the acquisition of real estate registered in a certain area. We also hope that nextyear, along with the transposition of the updated Capital Requirements Directive, our arsenal willbe complemented by the possibility to impose additional sectoral capital requirements forcommercial banks. They would allow increasing capital requirements for separate loan types –for instance, to purchase housing registered in a particular city.And finally: both the nature and economy love balance or, in other words, one’s misfortune canturn out to be another’s find. In this case, it also cannot be ruled out that the current healthemergency may give an impetus to the housing market in some respect. For instance, anincrease in remote work gives rise to a need for a separate working space, which mayencourage households to look for more spacious homes, while savings made due to restrictionson travel or leisure may encourage investment in housing.I understand that such considerations may sound overly optimistic and reassuring, thus I wouldlike to add a warning: it is not yet time to pop the champagne cork. We are now in our secondlockdown, which may not be the last one. This time, forecasting its fallout on the economy and,simultaneously, on the real estate market is definitely not a simple task. Meanwhile, there is,unfortunately, an extremely wide array of risks unfolding before our eyes.For example, will the housing market maintain its high resilience level? Or will households beable to successfully meet their existing liabilities? The pandemic and the imposed economicrestrictions have hit catering, accommodation and travel-related services particularly hard. It istrue that these activities account for a minor share of GDP, comprising less than 2%. However,these sectors typically employ younger staff aged between 18 and 35. And it is young people whoare the most active homebuyers or tenants.Dear all,the commercial real estate market showed signs of uncertainty even before the secondlockdown. And the recent trends indicate that the outlook of this segment remains uncertain. 2 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
The pandemic may tilt the scales to the benefit of the housing market, yet the implications for thecommercial real estate market will often be the opposite. For instance, the vacancy rate of officespace in Vilnius is projected to increase substantially next year, which will certainly be mostlydetermined by the shift to remote work.Moreover, the pandemic has disrupted brick-and-mortar trade and accelerated a shift towardselectronic commerce, which adds to the pressure in some parts of the commercial real estatemarket. For instance, rental income of certain shopping centres fell by nearly one-third in thesecond quarter of the year. Limited data available for the third quarter suggests that partially liftedmovement restrictions have also brought rental income from commercial property back to itsprevious level. Nonetheless, it looks like the commercial sector is set to undergo significantchanges, which require adequate preparation and a realistic assessment of future prospects.Hence, the commercial real estate market is facing serious challenges, which will become evenmore daunting if the current situation leads to a structural break and evolve into “a new normal” inthe post-pandemic world.The situation of real estate developers and construction enterprises is also far fromunambiguous. It is true that financial performance of construction companies remain sustainable,the existing stock of liquid assets is much larger than before the previous crisis, while the debtlevel is now much lower. However, the problem is that this sector is particularly vulnerable tointernal and external shocks due to its pro-cyclicality. Let me explain what I mean.The global economy is obviously going through the biggest shock since World War II. Growthforecasts for the world’s major economies do not indicate a rapid recovery, while global tradehas slowed down. All of this means that Lithuania’s economic growth in the near future shouldalso be more sluggish than that to which we have become used to. Looking back at the previouscrisis, memories of which have not yet faded away, it can be stated that the construction sectoris usually among the first to feel the effects of economic deterioration.Therefore, it is necessary to think several steps ahead, duly assess the risks taken and build upsufficient buffers for inevitable contingencies in order to adequately adapt to the changingsituation in the real estate market. This implies careful preparations for potential developments.Dear viewers and listeners,As much as we are concerned about the current issues, we cannot forget the risks that havebuilt up before the pandemic and are relevant to all segments of the real estate market. Today,these risks have to be observed and assessed with particular care.First of all, I would like to mention demography. Lithuania’s population is ageing, despitenoticeable improvements in the country’s migratory balance. The European Commission’sestimates continue to show that the share of people aged between 18 and 35 in the country’spopulation will decrease by approximately one-fifth in a decade’s time. If demographic trendsremain intact, this will inevitably have significant and, unfortunately, adverse consequences forthe entire Lithuanian economy, including its real estate market. Another important factor isaccess to credit.Another important factor is access to credit.This year, we continue to observe a trend of a year-on-year decrease in new bank loans to thereal estate sector. Approximately half of the construction companies surveyed by the Bank ofLithuania reported that their loan or refinance applications had been rejected, which was thehighest share of rejections compared to other sectors. Access to finance for real estatedevelopers has been far from encouraging too, with one out of three applications rejected. 3 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
Financial market participants engaged in lending to businesses admit that, as far as real estatedevelopers are concerned, tighter curbs have only been applied to lending to accommodationand public catering enterprises, which have taken a severe hit from the pandemic. Financialinstitutions likely hedge themselves against the pandemic-induced uncertainty and too far-reaching ambitions of their customers. However, sudden funding cuts may entail additional risksfor builders and developers.Therefore, it is particularly important that funding sources for real estate undertakings andconstruction companies grow in range and diversity. And we can already see this happening –businesses increasingly tap other sources, such as non-financial corporations, non-bankingfinancial institutions and funds.Dear colleagues,our today’s event is a good opportunity to assess the potential fallout from the pandemic on thereal estate market, to discuss the challenges that are currently emerging or will appear in thenear future, as well as potential preventive measures to reduce likely imbalances.By joining this conference, you have confirmed that you are interested in the real estate marketenvironment and look for credible information and well-founded answers. We aim for the samegoal. I very much hope that the eighth conference will be as successful as the previous ones.I wish you fruitful discussions that will help better understand the prevailing threats and risks aswell as discover solutions to the most pressing issues.   4 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
Jorgovanka Tabaković: Financial service in the era of digitaleconomyAddress by Ms Jorgovanka Tabaković, Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, at the 17th ChinaInternational Finance Forum, virtual, 17-18 December 2020.*   *   *Honoured hosts, esteemed participants of the 17th China International Finance Forum,it is my pleasure to greet you on behalf of the National Bank of Serbia and my own, even if it is inthis virtual way. The topic of this year’s Forum emerged on its own. It is not easy to talk aboutfinancial services in the era of digital economy in front of you because you are the leaders in thisrespect.But it is not difficult either, because you are the kind of leaders that assist and encourage othersto make advances in this field.You are the leaders who share their experience and knowledge with others. And Serbia is a proofof that.This is a good opportunity to quote a great Serbian poet Desanka Maksimović and her timelessadvice to young people:  STAY HEALTHY, GAIN KNOWLEDGE AND LOVE YOUR COUNTRY.We live at a time when knowledge has taken a back seat to information and when wisdom hastaken a back seat to knowledge. And wisdom is eternal. Like the ancient Chinese piece ofwisdom that if you think in terms of centuries, you should teach the people. That is why I first and foremost want to say that technology should serve people and not the otherway round.Innovations make our lives easier and safer. They save time, our most valuable resource.Therefore, they are tools for achieving goals, and not the goal itself. Chinese citizens know thisvery well, because you are global leaders in this respect. You know that technology alone cannotsolve big economic challenges: it cannot set priorities, or make decisions about spending andinvestments. People will always be those who make these calls. This is why technology mustserve people, and not the other way around. On this path, as on any other, we are called tocooperate. Serbia wants to build future with those who look far and see far. With our provenfriends who are creating future to the benefit of the human civilisation, which can survive andthrive only if we all cooperate.Dear friends,for the National Bank of Serbia, easier and cheaper financial services are among our toppriorities. In the centre, at the end and at the beginning – is man and its wellbeing in the 21stcentury.Acting in this manner – proactively, more than two years ago, the National Bank of Serbiadeveloped a national instant payments system: our NBS IPS. Since October 2018, our citizensand corporates can use a modern payment system, available to them at all times, 24 hours aday, with the option of executing a money transfer in one second. Our NBS IPS is one of the firstinstant payment systems in the world – it was introduced a month before the ECB launched itssystem. The option to pay bills of any major service provider within seconds – simply byscanning the NBS IPS QR code – is another thing that makes Serbia unique in this part ofEurope. 1 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
Here in Serbia, we worked hard on a law governing the issuance, secondary trading andprovision of services related to digital commerce. Platforms for trading in virtual currencies andtheir exchange for money will come to life in Serbia, but security will remain our priority. Providersof these services will be carefully licensed and supervised equally so.While developing services, we don’t let our guard down for a moment when it comes to thesecurity of our payment infrastructure. All of the most successful countries have their nationalcards, because not using expensive international brands allows them to make savings and toensure the independence of their own payment infrastructure. This is another field where Serbiastands out, because we have our Serbian Dina card. We named it Dina symbolically – after ournational currency, the dinar, whose relative stability is the backbone of the overallmacroeconomic stability in Serbia. A nation has its language, and a national financial system hasits national payment card – therefore, it is our obligation to choose who to cooperate with onmaking it stronger. We have chosen the largest card system in the world – China UnionPay.Personally, I had the privilege to agree on the details of our cooperation and sign the Agreementon Cooperation, as the crown of our efforts. The UnionPay card is already accepted at ATMs inSerbia, and our goal is to ensure that it is accepted in the entire acceptance network of ournational card system. We have also agreed with China UnionPay to issue our joint Serbian-Chinese DinaCard–UnionPay payment card.Esteemed colleagues,consumer habits are increasingly changing. It is up to us to keep up with these changes, as wellas to encourage them. Today, financial service consumers in Serbia are among the first inEurope to be able to conclude distance financial contracts with full transparency, security andprotection of their rights. And they can save time in this way! Because the purpose of thedigitalisation of services is not, for example, to just pay a bill by mobile phone, but to save ourtime and money by not having to go to the bank in person.Dear friends,i am confident that we will easily agree that there can be no development of financial serviceswithout the development of society and economies. Nothing connects countries and peoples aswell as the economy and mutual interests! The Republic of Serbia will always be committed todiversification of investors and markets, and to nurturing friendship and economic ties with ourproven friends, despite pressures. Allow me to repeat that this is our commitment because,aware of our size, but also of our history, we are building our future with those who look far, seefar and create the future to the benefit of our civilisation, which can only survive and prosper ifnations cooperate and agree.The economic cooperation between the Republic of Serbia and the People’s Republic of China isaccelerating, as is the friendship between Serbian President Aleksandar Vučić and ChinesePresident Xi Jinping. I have been at the helm of the National Bank of Serbia for the ninth year andin this period we have worked strategically on the development of the Chinese-Serbian monetaryand financial cooperation. In the Western Balkan region, the Bank of China has chosen Serbia asits centre, and from Serbia it supports the business of Chinese companies with its activities. TheChinese yuan is tradable in our foreign exchange market, and we have signed agreements withthe People’s Bank of China and the competent regulatory bodies to accompany our fast-growingeconomic relations. Serbia is part of the Chinese global initiative “One Belt, One Road”, and asfor the importance of Chinese investments, 13% of total FDI inflow to Serbia since 2016 camefrom China. Also of strategic importance are investments by Chinese companies engaged inworks on road infrastructure, which is an important condition for the development of the Serbianeconomy and has been underway for quite some time already. And while some countries areputting up “walls”, we are building roads and bridges together that are worthy of the 21st century.Esteemed participants of the 17th China International Finance Forum, 2 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
it is my personal belief that digitalisation is an opportunity for the development of any country.Serbia is utilising this opportunity every day, and the People’s Republic of China is our reliablepartner on this path. It is our task to fortify each segment of our society and create conditions fordignified and rich life and work. I believe that this way we endorse people’s expectations of abetter life, which are justified. Allow me to conclude. Technologies should serve people, therefore– people and technologies, not people or technologies.I wish us all health, knowledge and love for our countries.May we have a successful 17th China International Finance Forum. 3 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
Yaron Amir: Competition and structural changesRemarks by Mr Yaron Amir, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at a Bank of Israel ResearchDepartment conference “Competition and structural changes”, virtual, 17 December 2020.*   *   *Good morning.I would like to welcome all the attendees of the conference. The topic of the conference is“Competition and Structural Changes”, an issue the importance of which is quite clear. Theguest lecture will be given by Prof. Thomas Philippon. Thomas has contributed much in hisacademic work to the interface of finance and macroeconomics. His many papers arecharacterized by original and creative thinking. In addition, I would like to thank the ResearchDepartment and its Director, Prof. Michel Strawczynski, for organizing this important conference.Holding the conference at this time, in spite of the pandemic, is very important. I have said in thepast, and reiterate, that the coronavirus crisis is also a key to many structural changes, of thekind that will help promote financial technology and accelerate growth and productivity.Holding this conference on line for the first time is one of many confirmations of the new age intowhich we have entered. This is actually not new technology that has just been developed, buttechnologies that have existed for years. However, the reality of the coronavirus has forced us toleave our comfort zone in which we all were and has made it possible for the acceleration oftechnology to merge into our daily lives. In the future, when these days are studied andexamined, I assume that this period will be able to be pointed to as the turning point, after whichthe economy changed, similar to other significant events that have occurred throughout humanhistory.In this regard, I have chosen to speak today about a very important area that is undergoingprofound change: financial innovation. The changing economic environment, together with theentry of technology companies into the financial services areas (fintech), is changing the existingmarket conditions, the manner in which financial services are provided and consumed, and thebusiness models according to which the existing financial entities operate.The research literature deals a lot with the connection between innovation and financialperformance. In my view, innovation is like a brush in the painter’s hand, contributing to creationand execution of positive changes in our lives. Innovation is the ability to achieve better solutionsin information systems, communication, technology, and marketing methods. Innovation isconsidered a generator of competitiveness and it is important not only for large companies butalso for small and medium sized enterprises (SME), which have a significant share in the area ofinnovation.The increasing number of innovative companies operating in financial areas and the rapid paceof developments in this areas, are already reaching into areas of activity that until recently werethe exclusive domain of the traditional financial entities, and are undermining their status.However, it should be remembered that innovation and technology are also an opening to manydiverse challenges, and we should take care to mange risks in a controlled manner.In Israel, we can find leadership of certain elements of innovation. For example, in fintech, Israelis among the world leaders—today there are more than 500 fintech startups in Israel, and theyhave grown rapidly in recent years and have generated a lot of interest among foreign investors.Thus, in 2019, investments in Israeli fintech companies reached $1.8 billion, making upapproximately 5 percent of total investment in fintech worldwide. Israel leads research anddevelopment areas in high-tech, and in fintech in particular, and a large part of investment in theeconomy is dedicated to that. 1 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
The Bank of Israel also promotes innovation in its areas of activity, and we set it at the top of thestrategic plan we formulated. Leadership in innovation in our areas of activity is a centraltarget from the Bank’s perspective, we are continuing to integrate and enableinnovation in banking and payment services, development of the capital market andcredit market and their integration into the changing environment:As such, the Bank of Israel has been working a lot to update the existing payment system inIsrael. The switch to a world of advanced and modern payments is a necessity. Paymentsystems that are convenient, efficient, secure, and stable are an important component ofevery advanced economy. The Israeli economy lags compared with other economies in theworld in terms of integration of advanced means of payment and the steps we are promoting willhelp to bridge over part of this gap.For example, implementing the EMV standard—the first stage in companies switching to it waslast week—is an initial step for the entry of advanced payment technologies and of other players,both domestic and global. The process will expand the range of possibilities available tobusinesses and consumers, such as executing smart transactions, contactless transactions,transactions via mobile phones, and it will accelerate the integration of electronic wallets andadvanced payment applications.The Bank of Israel supports the development of a Faster Payment infrastructure that will make itpossible to expand the range of payment possibilities in the payment system and to carry out,among other things, direct payments from a customers’ account, conveniently and efficiently 24hours a day, every day. Promoting a Faster Payment system will reduce transaction costs, allowcross-border settlement, increase businesses’ liquidity, and will reduce the use of cash.In addition, the Bank of Israel is examining additional steps to promote innovation and efficiencyof the payment system in general, and of faster payment in particular. This is with an emphasison the following issues: cross-broder payments, integration of electronic wallet payments,regulation of the execution of payments at businesses, and more.Another project that the Bank is promoting is Open FinanceI would like to emphasize that from my perspective, its “Open Finance” and not “OpenBanking”. The idea is to take away the control of customers’ information and financial activitiesfrom the traditional financial entities and not just from banks, and to transfer the power to thecustomers themselves. We support promoting an “open financial world” which will include all thecreators of all financial products.Behind the scenes there will be a uniform API standard, which the Bank is now promotingenergetically, and that will allow a secure way to transfer customers’ data from the customer’sservice provider to a third party—such as another bank, a nonbank entity, a fintech company, etc.The advantages of this process are: strengthening the customer’s control over information abouthim or her, enhancing competition in the area of financial services, comparing costs, providingfinancial value proposals and financial intermediation, consulting on financial conduct, initiatingfinancial activities, and more.In this regard, it is important for there to be access to all the financial players—to all the requiredinformation, as is generally accepted worldwide. These entities will be able to provide informationand to offer advanced services.An additional issue that we are promoting is securitizationA securitization transaction is one in which a corporation issues bonds whose maturity issecured by expected cash flows. While around the world the securitization market is about as 2 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
large as the corporate bond market, in Israel this market is tiny and its value is only severalbillion shekels. This is, among other things, due to the lack of an appropriate regulatoryinfrastructure.The ability of the various entities to extend credit directly is limited, due to the significant operatingand collection costs and because Israel does not have a developed securitization market, whichwould allow the expansion of credit while continuing its operation by banks, who have a structuralcomparative advantage in this market.By using the securitization tool, credit providers who are not necessarily financial companies willbe able to sell credit portfolios that have already been extended and to use the compensation inorder to extend new credit. The securitization market will thus help in reducing the costs ofsources of financing and in dispersing the risks in the economy. This is a tool that bridgesbetween the money that is held by the various entities and the credit consumers in the economy.Securitization allows the expansion of institutional investors’ investment horizons, and allows thefreeing up of capital and the managing of duration in the banking system.As I noted, developing the securitization market will lead to a broader dispersion of the risks infinancial markets, and to an increase in the accessibility to sources of financing for entities thatare not “classic” credit providers. Thus, for example, it will be possible to securitize a range ofasset-backed flows—such as commercial loan payments, debts from credit card transactions,municipal taxes, leasing, etc. As such, securitization is an extremely important tool for thedevelopment of the capital market in Israel, particularly in the current period of crisis, and thedevelopment of the economy on the day after.In order to advance this, an appropriate legal, tax, regulatory, and accounting infrastructurefor carrying out securitization transactions in Israel needs to be set up.As I have mentioned in the past, another area in which the Bank of Israel is working to developand institutionalize is the Telbor interest rates as benchmark rates for shekel interest. Theseinterest rates allow the use of not only a fixed nominal interest rate or daily variable rate, but alsoan interest rate that changes over longer and predefined periods of time. They make up animportant and central pillar in capital markets around the world, and with their help it will bepossible to increase the financing possibilities for the business sector.Benchmark interest rates also serve as an infrastructure for forward interest-rate contracts,contracts that make it possible for companies and the public to reduce interest rate risks.It is reasonable to assume that within the framework of an efficient Telbor market, financialcompanies will have the opportunity to hedge and better manage their balance of risks. They willbe able to do this by adopting the long-term IRS instrument, which is an instrument forexchanging cash flows between a fixed interest rate and a variable interest rate, which ultimatelywill lower costs for the end consumer as well. We are examining the best platform forimplementing the activity of this market—against the background of the major challenges inthose markets. In view of the lack of conditions for developing an interbank market, thedevelopment of a repo market looks like the most significant alternative for developingbenchmark interest rates in the market.The various tools that I have mentioned today have already existed in the world for some time,some of which, as noted, are being implemented and promoted now in Israel. Theirimplementation in the domestic market, in an integrative manner, will accelerate the financialinnovation processes in Israel and will contribute to the promotion of competition in the financialmarket in Israel.In conclusion, remember that together with financial innovation come numerous challenges andrisks, with an emphasis on cyber and information protection. To promote innovation we 3 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
understand that we have to take risks—in our terms: we have to define a “risk appetite”. At thesame time, when a risk is realized we have to confirm that it does not have macroprudentialramifications. This has to be reflected at the country level as well, by financial regulators as wellas the participants themselves.I wish you all a continued productive and informative conference.​ 4 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
SUZUKI Hitoshi Member of the Policy Board Bank of Japan December 3, 2020   (English translation based on the Japanese original) Economic Activity, Prices,  and Monetary Policy in Japan  Speech at a Meeting with Local Leaders in Fukushima (via webcast) 
1 I. Recent Economic and Price Developments A. Developments in Overseas Economies I would like to begin my speech by talking about overseas economies.  Overseas economies have picked up from a state of significant depression. Specifically, the growth rates for the April-June quarter of 2020 were substantially negative in many economies that implemented measures such as lockdowns in response to the spread of the novel coronavirus (COVID-19), mainly in Europe and the United States. However, the growth rates of these economies for the July-September quarter turned significantly positive, partly reflecting the materialization of pent-up demand and the effects of a recovery in production from the decline brought about by COVID-19, amid a resumption of economic activity. As for the outlook, overseas economies are likely to continue improving, partly supported by aggressive macroeconomic policies taken by each country and region, with the impact of COVID-19 waning gradually. However, the pace of improvement is expected to be only moderate. This is because many countries and regions are projected to experience negative growth for 2020, given that Europe and the United States are currently facing a serious resurgence of infectious cases, and also because firms and households are likely to remain vigilant against the risk of infection until effective medicines and vaccines are developed and widely distributed (Chart 1).  B. Recent Developments in Japan's Economy Based on the aforementioned developments in overseas economies, let me now move on to economic activity and prices in Japan.  Japan's economy has picked up with economic activity resuming, although it has remained in a severe situation due to the impact of COVID-19 at home and abroad. In the April-June quarter of 2020 -- the period most affected by the spread of COVID-19 as the state of emergency was in place -- the real GDP growth rate registered the largest-ever decline since 1980, from when comparable data are available, marking minus 8.2 percent on a quarter-on-quarter basis; however, the growth rate for the July-September quarter turned positive as economic activity resumed at home and abroad (Chart 2).  
2 Exports have increased with the pick-up in overseas economies. Especially with respect to exports of automobile-related goods, a recovery in automobile sales in the United States, Europe, and China has had a positive spillover effect on production of parts, materials, and other goods. Regarding IT-related exports, firm developments have been seen in parts for data centers and those related to personal computers, both of which are associated with teleworking. Furthermore, exports of capital goods, which were on the decline amid a global postponement of business fixed investment, have bottomed out recently.  Private consumption has picked up gradually on the whole. That said, there is a difference in the speed of recovery in the consumption of goods and that of services. Durable goods such as household electrical appliances and automobiles have been partly buoyed by the government's provision of special cash payments to all individuals living in Japan and by pent-up demand, while nondurable goods such as food and daily necessities have remained firm on the back of the expansion in stay-at-home consumption. By contrast, consumption of services, such as eating and drinking as well as accommodations, has remained at a low level, although it has headed toward a pick-up from the bottom hit in the April-May period, when the state of emergency was in place. Despite demand stimulus measures such as the "Go To" campaign having yielded hopeful signs since autumn, primarily in eating and drinking as well as accommodations, COVID-19 has resurged recently and its impact warrants concern. With regard to the outlook, private consumption is likely to continue picking up on the whole. Nevertheless, the pace of the pick-up is highly likely to remain quite moderate, particularly with regard to dining-out and services for individuals, due to strong vigilance against COVID-19, mainly among seniors.  As just explained, exports and goods consumption have been recovering. On the other hand, the prolonged impact of COVID-19, especially in services such as eating and drinking as well as accommodations, has been exerting downward pressure on business fixed investment and the employment and income situation.  Business fixed investment has been on a declining trend against the background of a deterioration in corporate profits and uncertainties over future developments, both stemming from COVID-19. This downtrend is likely to continue for the time being, mainly in terms of 
3 investment in the construction of stores and accommodation facilities by the eating and drinking as well as accommodation industries. That said, software investment has remained firm; the software investment plan for fiscal 2020 in the Bank of Japan's September Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan) has been revised upward from the June survey, and the year-on-year rates of increase have been at relatively high levels, mainly in the communications, information services, and retail industries (Chart 3). The factors behind this are likely to be the continuing trend since before the outbreak of COVID-19 of enhancing business efficiency and undertaking labor-saving investment, as well as firms' active fixed investment in growth areas such as e-commerce and teleworking amid the prolonged impact of the pandemic.  Weakness can be seen in employment: the diffusion index for employment conditions showing a net "excessive" for both the manufacturing industry and the accommodations as well as eating and drinking services industry in the September Tankan, a decline in the active job openings-to-applicants ratio, and a rise in the unemployment rate (Chart 4). Moreover, with respect to wages, non-scheduled cash earnings have decreased, reflecting a decline in working hours. Bonuses, which lag behind corporate profits by about half a year, are expected to be weak this winter.  C. Recent Price Developments Let me elaborate on price developments in Japan. The year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) for all items less fresh food, or the core CPI, has recently decelerated, registering minus 0.7 percent for October (Chart 5). Factors contributing to the decline in the CPI include the past decline in crude oil prices, a downturn in charges for hotels and for package tours to overseas, a deceleration in the rate of increase in prices of food products that are sensitive to economic activity, and a decline in prices of clothing. Contributing factors also include the decrease in hotel charges that reflects discounts offered under the "Go To Travel" campaign and the dissipation of the upward pressure on prices generated by the consumption tax hike in 2019. From a macroeconomic perspective, the output gap, which indicates the supply-demand balance, declined substantially in the April-June quarter of 2020. Subsequently, it is likely to head toward a pick-up, mainly for the manufacturing industry. However, the gap is expected to register a relatively large negative 
4 figure, with the impact of COVID-19 exerting downward pressure on working hours and the capital utilization rate in the nonmanufacturing industry (Chart 6). In these circumstances, medium- to long-term inflation expectations, which represent the perception of firms and households regarding future prices, have weakened somewhat (Chart 7).  On the other hand, price cuts that aim at stimulating demand have not been observed widely. This is because cutting prices cannot be expected to boost demand when the primary cause of the decrease in demand is consumers' vigilance against COVID-19, as is the case with face-to-face services. Another reason is that firms are finding it difficult to make price cuts that would lead to a further deterioration in their profits, given the current public health necessity of limiting customer numbers to avoid crowding.  D. Outlook for Economic Activity in Japan With economic activity resuming and the impact of COVID-19 waning gradually, Japan's economy is likely to continue on an improving trend, supported by accommodative financial conditions and the government's economic measures. However, the pace of recovery is expected to be only moderate as firms and households remain vigilant against COVID-19 while it continues to have a worldwide impact. Thereafter, as the impact subsides globally, the economy is projected to keep improving with overseas economies returning to a steady growth path. Given these factors, in the Bank's October 2020 Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (Outlook Report), the forecasts of the majority of Policy Board members for the real GDP growth rate are in the range of minus 5.6 to minus 5.3 percent, 3.0 to 3.8 percent, and 1.5 to 1.8 percent for fiscal 2020, 2021, and 2022, respectively (Chart 8).  E. Outlook for Prices Next, I will touch on the outlook for prices. In the October Outlook Report, the forecasts of the majority of Policy Board members for the year-on-year rate of change in the core CPI are in the range of minus 0.7 to minus 0.5 percent, 0.2 to 0.6 percent, and 0.4 to 0.7 percent for fiscal 2020, 2021, and 2022, respectively (Chart 8). The background to these forecasts is as follows.  
5 First, as I mentioned earlier, COVID-19 will affect the prices of such items as energy and travel-related services in the short run. Prices of items that are sensitive to economic activity, such as food products, durable goods, clothing, and dining-out, are also highly likely to come under gradual downward pressure. Furthermore, mobile phone-related prices are projected to continue showing some weakness, reflecting the price-setting stance of major carriers and competitiveness in the industry.  Nevertheless, in due course, movement toward price rises is expected to resume with the impact of COVID-19 waning and Japan's economy improving. In other words, the downward pressure from the decline in crude oil prices and the "Go To Travel" campaign will dissipate, while upward pressure on prices of goods and services that are sensitive to economic activity will gradually heighten along with improvement in the output gap. Against this background, medium- to long-term inflation expectations also are expected to rise again.  F. Risks to Economic Activity and Prices However, the outlook for economic activity and prices remains extremely unclear. In particular, the impact of COVID-19 on domestic and overseas economies continues to require close and careful monitoring. Until effective medicines and vaccines are developed and widely distributed, it is highly unclear how the COVID-19 pandemic will evolve and how long it will take for it to subside. It is also uncertain how firms' and households' behavior, including price setting, will change as they struggle to live with COVID-19. Moreover, if COVID-19 has a larger impact than expected, there is a risk that deterioration in the real economy will affect financial system stability, thereby exerting further downward pressure on the real economy.  II. Conduct of Monetary Policy A. Enhancement of Monetary Easing in Light of the Impact of COVID-19 Let me now turn to the Bank's policy conduct.  With COVID-19 spreading worldwide, global financial and capital markets have been unstable, while financial conditions have become less accommodative in terms of corporate financing, as seen in the deterioration in firms' financial positions due to declining sales and 
6 profits. Given these developments, the Bank has enhanced monetary easing since March by implementing the following three measures with a view to supporting corporate financing and maintaining stability in financial markets (Chart 9).  The first measure is the Special Program to Support Financing in Response to the Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19). This program consists of the Bank's purchases of CP and corporate bonds within about 20 trillion yen and the introduction of funds-supplying operations of about 120 trillion yen to encourage lending by financial institutions. The latter includes a scheme in which the government takes the credit risk of lending by financial institutions to small and medium-sized firms and the Bank provides funds to those financial institutions on favorable terms.  The second measure is an ample provision of yen and foreign currency funds. The Bank decided to purchase a necessary amount of Japanese government bonds (JGBs) without limit, with a view to maintaining stability in the bond market and stabilizing the entire yield curve at a low level. It has also decided to provide a large amount of U.S. dollar funds based on cooperation with five other major central banks.  The third measure is active purchases of exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs). The aim is to prevent firms' and households' sentiment from deteriorating through volatility in financial markets, thereby supporting positive economic activity.  The Bank assesses that these three measures have been functioning effectively. Specifically, tension in financial markets has eased, although they are still nervous. In addition, despite weakness in financial positions of firms, the environment for external funding, such as bank borrowing and the issuance of CP and corporate bonds, has remained accommodative, partly owing to private financial institutions having actively fulfilled the functioning of financial intermediation.  
7 B. Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) with Yield Curve Control While the Bank has enhanced monetary easing in light of the impact of COVID-19, as I have just outlined, it has been pursuing powerful monetary easing for more than seven and a half years since the introduction of QQE in 2013. Under powerful monetary easing, with a view to achieving the price stability target of 2 percent, the Bank has made clear its intention to continue with QQE with Yield Curve Control, as long as it is necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner. Controlling short- and long-term interest rates -- so-called yield curve control -- facilitates the formation of the term structure of interest rates that is most appropriate for achieving the price stability target. Specifically, the Bank applies a negative interest rate of minus 0.1 percent to a portion of financial institutions' current account balances at the Bank, and purchases JGBs so that 10-year JGB yields will remain at around 0 percent (Chart 10).  As a result of resolutely continuing with such powerful monetary easing, Japan's economy had continued, up until around 2019, on an expanding trend with a virtuous cycle from income to spending operating. As for prices, the underlying trend in the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI less fresh food and energy had been generally in positive territory for seven years. Unfortunately, however, the momentum toward achieving the price stability target has been lost temporarily due to COVID-19, and thus it is assumed that monetary easing will be prolonged further.  III. Monetary Policy in Prospect of Further Prolongation of Low Interest Rates As just explained, the positive effects of the Bank's powerful monetary easing measures have materialized under the prolonged low interest rate environment. On the other hand, although more than seven and a half years have passed since the Bank introduced QQE, the projected rate of increase in the core CPI for fiscal 2022 is still only about 0.7 percent, which is far below the target. It is therefore certain that monetary easing will be prolonged further. It is likely to take more time for prices to rise, in part because the negative output gap will exert downward pressure on prices for the time being, and because medium- to long-term inflation expectations will weaken somewhat through the adaptive expectation formation mechanism while the rate of change in the CPI is expected to be negative. In addition to these, I am paying close attention to three factors from the standpoint of the general public. 
8 A. Potential Factors Constraining Price Rises The first factor concerns wages. According to an announcement by the Japanese Trade Union Confederation (Rengo), base pay rose for a seventh consecutive year in the annual spring labor-management wage negotiations in 2020. However, the average rate of increase over those seven years was around 0.5 percent, which is only marginal in terms of the price stability target. Unfortunately, given the deterioration in corporate profits brought about by the impact of COVID-19, it seems unlikely that the pace of increase in wages will boost its momentum in fiscal 2021. In addition, partly because winter bonuses are expected to be weak, as I mentioned earlier, wages are likely to remain under downward pressure for the time being. Furthermore, an increasing number of firms have started to replace seniority-based wage systems with merit-based systems, and to pursue greater labor mobility through such initiatives as a shift from lifetime employment to job-based employment. These trends are desirable and necessary in the medium to long term for firms and Japan's economy to increase productivity. On the other hand, there are concerns that average wages and the propensity to consume may be negatively affected by the gradual loss of wage and employment systems that enable workers to feel that their wages are steadily rising in line with the number of years worked.  The second factor is the decline in land prices. Looking at prices as of July 1 at representative locations, released in September, the year-on-year rate of change in the nationwide average turned to a decline for the first time in three years, registering minus 0.6 percent. This is likely to be due to the sharp drop in the number of visitors to Japan and voluntary stay-at-home behavior, both resulting from the impact of COVID-19. Since land, relative to stocks, is larger in terms of total asset value and in terms of proportion held by individuals, there is concern over how the decline in land prices will affect consumer sentiment.  The third is the impact on future sentiment of many consumers facing an unforeseen decline in income. Since before the outbreak of COVID-19, concern over public pension funds -- namely, whether they will provide adequate benefits -- is likely to have constrained consumption among the young and middle-aged generations. For seniors, the constraining factor is said to be the "longevity risk," or in other words, the risk that their savings will be insufficient to cover a rise in healthcare expenditure and living expenses as they live longer 
9 than expected. In the wake of COVID-19, another potential factor constraining consumption has arisen -- that is, the risk that future income will decline unexpectedly due to such incidents as the spread of the pandemic. There is concern that this might further raise households' propensity to save and that downward pressure on consumption might be exerted accordingly.  B. Sustainability and Flexibility of Monetary Easing Given that it is expected to take more time to achieve the price stability target, due in part to the impact of COVID-19, I think it will become even more important for monetary easing measures to be sustainable and flexible. Let me now share my thoughts on this.  Stability of the financial system is indispensable for monetary easing measures to have a sustained impact. I have repeatedly stressed the view that it is particularly important to aim at achieving both price stability and financial system stability when conducting monetary policy. This is because, as the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) revealed, once the financial system destabilizes, it is extremely difficult for the Bank to ensure price stability, resulting in a failure to meet both objectives.  Smooth functioning of financial intermediation has so far been ensured due to financial institutions' robust financial bases, both in terms of capital and liquidity, as well as policy responses by the Bank and the government. However, if these institutions' financial soundness deteriorates further due to a fall in lending rates and an increase in credit costs, the smooth functioning of financial intermediation could be impaired, posing a risk that downward pressure will be exerted on the real economy.  On this point, financial institutions' lending rates have been at extremely low levels, partly reflecting intensified competition among institutions, in a situation where demand for new loans is limited due to declines in population and the number of firms across regions, and where the low interest rate environment is prolonged. In addition, attention should be paid to the point that the program of interest-free and unsecured loans currently implemented to support corporate financing might exert downward pressure on spreads on regular loans that are made without the support of the program, even after the impact of COVID-19 subsides.  
10 Credit costs could increase, as financial institutions provide active support for firms whose financial positions have deteriorated due to COVID-19, and a certain proportion of the loans could become nonperforming. So far, the increase in credit costs does not seem to be as serious as that observed after the GFC; however, as COVID-19 may have a protracted impact on corporate sales and profits, attention should continue to be paid to future developments. Furthermore, even since before the outbreak of COVID-19, financial institutions have been actively extending loans to firms with relatively high credit risk and investing in high-risk overseas assets, with the narrowing of lending margins and declines in JGB yields under prolonged monetary easing. This may be another risk factor to the outlook.  Under these circumstances, developments in super-long-term interest rates will be key to maintaining stability of financial institutions' financial conditions. Specifically, financial institutions raise funds through such means as deposit taking or the Bank's operations, and invest these funds, mainly through lending or JGB purchases. In doing so, they raise funds in the short term and invest them in the long term; in other words, the differences in maturities between funding and investment will be the basic revenue sources for these institutions. While this is somewhat technical, under the concept of asset liability management, these differences represent interest rate risk, and banks gain profits by taking this risk. While financial institutions have been increasing their lending, it seems that they have a strong incentive to hold long-term JGBs since the share of loans with long-term fixed interest rates is generally not large.  One of the objectives behind the Bank's introduction of yield curve control was to prevent an excessive flattening of the yield curve, which might raise concerns about the sustainability of financial functioning in a broad sense and exert adverse effects on consumer sentiment, mainly through limited investment opportunities in terms of pension and insurance products. Super-long-term interest rates rose over the six months or so following the introduction of yield curve control, but they have recently been at slightly lower levels than at that time. It is desirable for the yield curve for super-long-term JGBs to become steeper at a moderate pace with the Bank keeping 10-year JGB yields at around 0 percent, in that financial institutions can improve profits on their investment and the Bank can achieve financial system stability while monetary easing is prolonged. 
11 Next, I would like to talk about the sustainability and flexibility of ETF and J-REIT purchases. As one component of its policy framework for achieving the price stability target, the Bank has been purchasing these assets to exert a positive influence on economic activity and prices by lowering the risk premia in the stock and REIT markets. Such asset purchases have proven effective in supporting firms' and households' positive economic activity by preventing their sentiment from deteriorating, mainly through volatility in financial markets. As I explained earlier, ETF and J-REIT purchases played a major role, particularly when financial markets became unstable due to the impact of COVID-19. Moreover, it is necessary to continue with such purchases in a situation where achieving the price stability target is likely to take more time. Given that monetary easing is expected to be further prolonged due in part to the impact of COVID-19, the Bank should look for additional ways to enhance the sustainability and flexibility of the policy measures so that it will not face difficulty in conducting ETF and J-REIT purchases when an appropriate lowering of risk premia of asset prices is absolutely necessary.  C. Raising Japan's Economic Growth Rate As just outlined, I think it has become increasingly important to enhance the sustainability and flexibility of the Bank's policy measures given the prospect of prolonged monetary easing. At the same time, however, boosting Japan's growth potential is also essential to achieving the price stability target. In this regard, as society and firms make efforts to raise the economic growth rate by realizing growth strategies and thereby bringing about changes in the economic structure, it has become vital to consider how monetary policy can contribute to these efforts.  As Japan's economy is in the process of recovering from the downturn caused by the impact of COVID-19, it is essential, for the time being, for the government and the Bank to support sustaining firms' businesses and employment through their various measures. However, there could be cases where less productive businesses continue to operate and even inefficient firms that would otherwise have shut down remain in business. This may induce side effects whereby Japan's productivity growth is weighed down over the long term. Therefore, I think it will become more important for society to move toward promoting such developments as 
12 digitalization and greater labor mobility, and for firms to allocate their capital to highly productive business areas based on sound growth strategies.  Even prior to the outbreak of COVID-19, the secular decline in the potential growth rate was a major issue for Japan, which has been facing structural problems such as the declining and aging population. Although Japan's economy has suffered a serious blow from the pandemic, there has been growth in businesses compatible with the new lifestyle that takes into consideration infection prevention, and teleworking is rapidly becoming widespread. Against this background, digitalization has gained momentum. From a medium- to long-term perspective, all of these factors are likely to act as a driving force that will shift Japan's economy toward achieving a higher growth rate.  For the time being, the Bank needs to do its utmost to conduct monetary policy with a view to supporting financing, mainly of firms, and maintaining stability in financial markets. However, from a medium- to long-term perspective, it is also important for the Bank to support from the financial side the efforts by society and firms to push forward with structural reforms and growth strategies. In doing so, it is of course essential that the Bank maintain accommodative financial conditions, thereby continuing to provide a solid foundation on which firms can take on risks and pursue change. At the same time, I think it is also important to encourage firms' investment in growth areas, mainly through financial institutions' expertise in examining the creditworthiness of firms and through the market mechanism, so that the potential growth rate will rise accordingly.  Thank you for your attention. 
Economic Activity, Prices, and Monetary Policy in JapanDecember 3, 2020SUZUKI HitoshiBank of JapanSpeech at a Meeting with Local Leadersin Fukushima (via webcast)
2021projectionCY20192020projection5.2Advanced Economies1.7-5.83.9World2.8-4.43.1Euro Area1.3-8.35.2United States2.2-4.3United Kingdom1.5-9.85.9Japan0.7-5.32.3Emerging Market andDeveloping Economies3.7-3.36.04.9-3.48.0China6.11.98.2Emerging and DevelopingAsia5.5-1.73.6real GDP growth rate, y/y % chg.Latin America and theCaribbean0.0-8.16.2Russia1.3-4.12.8ASEAN-5IMF World Economic Outlook(as of October 2020)Chart 1Source: World Economic Outlook,IMF.
Japan's Real GDPChart 2Source: Cabinet Office.s.a., q/q % chg.Q3Q4Q1Q2Q30.0-1.8-0.6-8.25.0[ann., q/q][0.2][-7.1][-2.3][-28.8][21.4]Private consumption0.4-2.9-0.7-8.14.7Private non-resi. investment0.2-4.81.7-4.5-3.4Private residential investment1.3-2.3-4.0-0.5-7.9Public demand0.90.40.0-0.11.9Exports of goods & services-0.60.4-5.3-17.47.02019Real GDP2020
Software Investment Plans (Tankan)Chart 30246810Mar.JuneSept.Dec.ForecastActualFY 2020FY 2015-2019 averageFY 2004-2019 averageSource:Bank of Japan.Note: Figures show the amount of newly recorded software investment under intangible fixed assets. Figures are for all industries and enterprises.y/y% chg.
01234560.00.20.40.60.81.01.21.41.61.8200507091113151719Active job openings-to-applicants ratio forfull-time employees (left scale)Active job openings-to-applicantsratio (left scale)Unemployment rate (right scale)CY-80-60-40-200204060200507091113151719All industriesManufacturingConstructionRetailingAccommodations, eating & drinking servicesCYLabor Market Conditionss.a.,ratios.a.,%Employment ConditionsDI (Tankan)Sources: Ministry of Health, Labourand Welfare;Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications.Source: Bank of Japan.Chart 4Active Job Openings-to-Applicants Ratio  and Unemployment Rate ExcessiveemploymentInsufficientemploymentreversed, DI ("excessive employment" minus "insufficient employment"), % points
-1.0-0.50.00.51.01.52.02013/Apr.Oct.14/Apr.Oct.15/Apr.Oct.16/Apr.Oct.17/Apr.Oct.18/Apr.Oct.19/Apr.Oct.20/Apr.Oct.All items less fresh food (core CPI)All items less fresh food and energyCPISource: Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications.Note: Figures exclude the effects of the consumption tax hike in April 2014.y/y % chg.Chart 5CY
-6.0-5.0-4.0-3.0-2.0-1.00.01.02.03.0Q1Q314/Q1Q315/Q1Q316/Q1Q317/Q1Q318/Q1Q319/Q1Q320/Q1Output GapChart 6%Excess demand(upward pressure on prices)Excess supply(downward pressure on prices)Source: Bank of Japan.Note: Based on staff estimates.CY 2013/
Inflation ExpectationsSource: Bank of Japan.Notes: 1. Figures for households are from the Opinion Survey on the General Public's Views and Behavior, estimated using the modified Carlson-Parkinmethod.2. Figures for firms are those for the Average of Enterprises'Inflation Outlook for all industries and enterprises in the Tankan.y/y, ann. avg., %Chart 70.00.51.01.52.02.5CY 200507091113151719Households (over the next five years)Firms (five years ahead)
Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices as of October 2020Forecasts of the Majority of Policy Board MembersSource: October 2020 Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices, Bank of Japan.Notes:   1. Figures in brackets indicate the medians of the Policy Board members' forecasts (point estimates).2. The forecasts of the majority of the Policy Board members are constructed as follows: each Policy Boardmember's forecast takes the form of a point estimate --namely, the figure to which he or she attaches the highestprobability of realization. These forecasts are then shown as a range, with the highest figure and the lowest figureexcluded. The range does not indicate the forecast errors.y/y % chg.Chart 8-5.6 to -5.3-0.7 to -0.5[-5.5][-0.6]+3.0 to +3.8+0.2 to +0.6[+3.6][+0.4]+1.5 to +1.8+0.4 to +0.7[+1.6][+0.7]+1.3 to +1.6+0.5 to +0.8 Forecasts made in July 2020+3.0 to +4.0+0.2 to +0.5Fiscal 2022 Forecasts made in July 2020-5.7 to -4.5-0.6 to -0.4Fiscal 2021Fiscal 2020 Forecasts made in July 2020CPI (all items less fresh food)Real GDP
The Bank's Measures in Response to COVID-19Chart 9Supporting Corporate FinancingSpecial Program to Support Financing in Response to COVID-19:total size of about 140 tril. yen + α Purchases of CP and corporate bonds: amount outstanding of about 20 tril. yen at maximum(previously, amount outstanding of about 5 tril. yen)Special Funds-Supplying Operations to Facilitate Financing in Response to COVID-19:about 120 tril. yenStabilizing Financial MarketsAmple and Flexible Provision of Yen and Foreign Currency FundsFurther active purchases of JGBs and T-Bills: unlimitedEnhancement of the U.S. Dollar Funds-Supplying Operations: unlimitedLowering Risk Premia in AssetMarketsActive Purchases of ETFs and J-REITsETFs: annual pace of about 6 tril. yen→ annual pace with the upper limit of about 12 tril. yen (for the time being)J-REITs: annual pace of about 90 bil. yen→ annual pace with the upper limit of about 180 bil. yen (for the time being)
Yield Curve ControlChart 10%residual maturity, year0      1      2     3     4     5     6     7     8     9     10     15     20        30        40   1.21.00.80.60.40.20.0-0.2 Short-term policy interest rate: minus 0.1 percentTarget level of the long-term interest rate(10-year JGB yields): around 0percent
  CENTRAL BANK OF KENYA  AFRO-ASIA FINTECH FESTIVAL NAIROBI ONLINE CITY In partnership with the 2020 Singapore Fintech Festival  Closing Remarks by Dr. Patrick Njoroge Governor, Central Bank of Kenya December 9, 2020  As Prepared for Delivery  Your Excellency Uhuru Kenyatta, President of the Republic of Kenya and Commander-in-Chief of the Kenya Defence Forces; Moderators, Speakers, Panelists and Partners; Distinguished Guests; Ladies and Gentlemen:  Good Morning, Good Afternoon, Good Evening! I am delighted to join you after three inspiring days of coming together to deliberate on the theme of “People and Talent: Harnessing Collaboration in Pursuit of Resilience and Growth Post COVID-19.’’ I am privileged today to welcome His Excellency President Uhuru Kenyatta to the Afro-Asia Fintech Festival Nairobi Online City at the 2020 Singapore Fintech Festival. His Excellency’s presence is testament to the high- level ownership of Kenya’s digital transformation strategy to spur shared prosperity for Kenyans.  Let me also take this opportunity to thank our hosts, moderators, speakers and panellists who accepted our invitation to join us over the last three days. I am grateful to our partners, service providers and the Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS) for walking with us on this journey. I would be remiss if I did not acknowledge the teams at the Central Bank of Kenya (CBK) who have worked tirelessly over the last few months to make this event a reality. Finally, we appreciate the hundreds of participants who joined the Nairobi Online City event, to be part of the conversation.  The last three days have been truly inspiring as we have shared successes and challenges in building back better through the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic. As I indicated in my opening remarks on Monday, 2020 has been an unprecedented year dominated by the COVID-19 pandemic. While the lives and livelihoods of citizens have been adversely affected, digitalization has ‘kept the lights on’ in the global economy. As we begin to turn the corner, we will look to digitalization as we ‘build back better.’ 
2   I did set the stage on Monday by highlighting three broad themes as we pursue global resilience and growth post COVID-19. I was pleased to note robust discussions over the last three days around the themes of restoring Small and Medium-size Enterprises (SMEs), partnerships and collaborations, and sustainable finance.  First, it was inspiring to hear the successes of financial institutions in digitizing the operations of SMEs. This has indeed accelerated during the pandemic as SMEs have pivoted their operations to adopt to COVID-19 containment measures. To address the cash flow constraints that SMEs have faced due to COVID-19 restrictions, banks have restructured their loans to see them through this turbulent times. Equally inspiring is the move by financial institutions and technology players to build the skills of SMEs by automating and training them on financial management. It will take Finance Plus which is access to finance and upskilling SMEs to restore them to drive growth and resilience post COVID-19. A lot more remains to be done in restoring SMEs but the green shots are sprouting and we need to nurture them carefully.  Second, on partnerships and collaborations, the key message was the need for increased collaboration in building a sustainable financial ecosystem. This approach leverages on expertise, resources and innovations from various players. Central to this is the building of the requisite infrastructure to connect our citizens to the digital realm. Significant resources and input will be required both from the public and private sectors to put together the requisite hardware and software for sustainable digital ecosystems. It was inspiring to hear from MAS on the global initiative to build foundational digital infrastructure drawing on the experience of Singapore, India and other global leaders. Collaborations such as these will enable countries learn from each other and fast track the development of foundational infrastructure in their countries without reinventing the wheel.  Third, on sustainable finance, the pandemic has brought home the inter-dependence of corporations and the communities they operate in. Together corporations and communities have worked together to mitigate the adverse impact of the pandemic. Illuminating experiences were pointed out where banks and other entities worked with their customers through this period through restructuring of loans and continued provision of services through digital platforms. More encouraging as we build back better were cases where banks and other entities worked with manufacturers and SMEs to pivot their operations to the new normal. This was particularly pertinent in the move towards domestic manufacture of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) which initially were sourced from overseas.  
3  As we build back better, sustainable finance will be imperative. In the long run, our vision at the CBK is that all finance will be green. We are working closely with the Kenyan banking sector whose leaders shared their experiences in this area. Green finance is particularly pertinent to Africa that contributes the least to pollution globally but bears the brunt of the adverse effects of climate change.  As we build our digital ecosystems, we must keep in view effective digital governance frameworks. As data trails grow, we must protect our citizens from abuse of their data and ensure they are well informed on the use of their data. We must also beware of new trends. For instance, banks increasingly rely on Artificial Intelligence (AI) to make decisions on access to credit particularly for SMEs. Rigorous evaluation of data models and their governance will be required to ensure that we do not introduce biases that inadvertently exclude the very citizens we are trying to on-board to digital ecosystems.  In closing, let me once again thank you all for your participation. CBK looks forward to continued engagement, partnership and collaboration as we build back better from COVID-19.  Ladies and Gentlemen, it is now my distinct honour and pleasure to invite His Excellency Uhuru Kenyatta, President of the Republic of Kenya and  Commander-In-Chief of the Kenya Defence Forces, to deliver his Keynote Address.  Karibu, Your Excellency!    
Abdul Rasheed Ghaffour: Keynote remarks -"3rd Singapore-China(Chongqing) Financial Summit 2020"Keynote remarks by Mr Abdul Rasheed Ghaffour, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank ofMalaysia (Bank Negara Malaysia), at the "3rd Singapore-China (Chongqing) Financial Summit2020", 24 November 2020.*   *   *ASEAN has significant achievements to its credit, particularly in promoting regional economicgrowth; peace; and stability since its formation slightly more than 5 decades ago. Our solidarityand unity have proven to be foundational for the region’s collective effort against COVID-19. Thisis reflected in the establishment of an ASEAN Response Fund; as well as Leaders’ pledge to,among others keep markets open, grow the digital economy and address climate change.We also recently witnessed a breakthrough in global trade with the signing of the RCEPAgreement that will open doors for trade and investments to flourish further.ASEAN’s journey to deepen financial integration and foster regional connectivity is integral increating a “highly integrated and cohesive economy”. Allow me to focus on two areas that couldbe of interest to the esteemed audience today.First – digital transformation – particularly the evolution of the real-time payments landscape inASEAN to support the growth of e-commerce, cross-border trade and tourism. Development ofan ASEAN Payments Policy Framework was followed by significant progress in cross-borderinteroperability of standardised QR code. This would facilitate payments and remittances.ASEAN’s increasingly interconnected and digital environment is supported by strong regulatorycooperation. There is also a dedicated platform to share information on cyber threats to build itscyber resilience.Second, is ASEAN’s intensified efforts towards the development of a green financial ecosystem.This follows the recent completion of guiding documents and roadmaps that chart the wayforward for the banking and capital markets sectors to support the greening of the ASEANeconomy. Sustainable finance is also now a permanent agenda of ASEAN Finance Ministers andGovernors Meetings.Malaysia is advancing the digital transformation of the financial sector. In the fintech space, wehave introduced the Fintech Regulatory Sandbox, launched a Fintech Booster program tosupport the growth and development of fintech companies and issued an e-KYC policy. Financialinstitutions and fintech players have made achievements in providing end-to-end digital solutionsfor SME financing. We are also currently developing an applicable licensing framework for digitalbanking. In the adoption of e-payments, progress has been in enabling the interoperability of e-wallet services offered by banks and non-bank e-money issuers. Malaysia is also fosteringgreater retail payment linkages with the region.As Malaysia lays the foundation for orderly transition to a low carbon economy, opportunities areaplenty for investments in green infrastructure. The recently announced Budget 2021 continuesthe Green Tech Financing Scheme that would encourage private sector participation in greentechnology. The Malaysian Government also plans to issue its first Sustainability Bond forenvironmental and social initiatives next year. Together with Securities Commission Malaysia,Bank Negara Malaysia co-chairs a Joint Committee comprising officials from the stock exchangeand industry to collaborate on building climate resilience within the Malaysian financial sector. Weare currently developing a principles-based taxonomy – to guide financial institutions to classifyeconomic activities that contribute to climate change objectives. These complement efforts bythe Islamic finance industry in driving the sustainability agenda through the value-based 1 / 2BIS central bankers' speeches
intermediation strategy. There are many reasons to be optimistic on the future of ASEAN-China economic ties. ASEANbecame China’s largest trading partner in first quarter 2020. Trade and investment flows grewdespite the crisis. China’s direct investment in ASEAN in first three quarters this year surged76.6 percent year-on-year. Investment from ASEAN into China increased by 6.6 percent year-on-year, and Malaysia is among the top investors. Many cooperative projects under theframework of the Belt and Road Initiative resumed rapidly after the initial shock of COVID-19.I echo our Prime Minister’s call last week for ASEAN and China to fully tap the potential of thedigital economy as part of our efforts to build a stronger economic region. Opportunities can alsobe unlocked for investments on green infrastructure – such as renewable and energy-efficienttechnologies, as well as addressing basic infrastructure gaps in a fiscally constrainedenvironment. Malaysia certainly welcomes China as a partner in this journey and we hope to seecloser relations with Chongqing.I am certain this Summit will explore these further and I wish the Summit success. Thank you.  Remarks by Ambassador Deng Xijun at the 3rd Jakarta Forum on ASEAN-China Relations in 2020:“Reinforcing Regional Economic Recovery amid COVID-19”, 2 November 2020. Malaysia is number three after Singapore and Thailand.1212 2 / 2BIS central bankers' speeches
Elvira Nabiullina: Speech - Federation Council’s Financial MarketDevelopment Board meetingSpeech by Ms Elvira Nabiullina, Governor of the Bank of Russia, at the Federation Council’sFinancial Market Development Board meeting, Moscow, 8 December 2020.*   *   *Good afternoon, dear Speaker and fellow colleagues,There is no denying the fact that the financial sector plays a critical part in the contextof our efforts to deliver on the national development agenda. Financial intermediariesand the stock market work to ensure that savings transform into investment, businesses obtainthe resources they need for development, and consumers gain the tools to grow their wealth.It is within our regulator’s mandate to oil the gears of all these mechanisms and make surethe financial sector provides excellent performance. This means that the costs of businessesand consumers related to their financial objectives should go down. And this means,as the Speaker has mentioned, that we should secure the emergence of long-term money.My deputy, Sergey Shvetsov, is here today to tell you more on our financial market agenda.In my opening remarks, I would like to expand on a number of key points in our operationsas a regulator, which have, in my view, major implications.It would be fair to say that this year has spurred transformation in the financial sector. Amongkey developments are accelerated digitalisation, the Bank of Russia’s switch to soft monetarypolicy, falling interest rates in the economy, pandemic-induced borrowers’ problems and a largevolume of restructured loans.For all its problems and obstacles, the year has laid bare the degree to which financialinstitutions and banks are prepared for unexpected circumstances. The resilience of banksand other financial institutions, and their so-called ability to adsorb the shocks the epidemichas brought about, suggest that rehabilitation of the Russian financial sector is an accomplishedfact.This is why recent months have seen — despite the difficulties — the financial sector evolvingand carrying on with providing support to the economy, as borrowing from banks has beenon the rise, and the stock market has been growing at a faster pace.Our current priority is to strike the right balance between the objectives of supporting economicrecovery and long-term projects as part of our national development agenda. It is essentialto ensure that a maturing financial market relies on the principles of trust and competition and —this is of paramount importance — the principle of customer interest protection (rather than onlyon a short-term gain strategy).You are aware that lending continued this year, unlike in prior times of crisis. More so, we haveseen record growth in mortgage lending, which is the point the Speaker has made. For all thesewelcome developments, our central focus should remain with the real target, which is to makehousing more available to people, and not to stage a kind of race for records. Our housingmarket has indeed a lot of growth potential: it is true that mortgage lending has yet to becomeas common as it is in many other countries. However, we should bear in mind, first, thatmortgage debt has been taking years to accumulate there and, second and most important,the accumulation of this debt should tally with a rise in household incomes. Hence the needto prevent the emergence of a bubble in this market and the real risks this bubble would carry,in order of priority, for people, developers and banks. This sector needs a long-term development 1 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
plan based on market principles.I cannot agree more with the Speaker on this subject: the government’s concessional lendingprogramme indeed helped stave off market failure at times of crises. At this point in timehowever, we are seeing that demand for mortgage loans is in a way increasingly translating intoa stampede, leading to unjustified price growth in several regions. Ultimately, developersand banks stand to take advantage of this programme, rather than consumers.It would do no harm to support them; however, our key objective is the availability of housing.We should focus increasingly on targeted support programmes, which includes the effortsto support the overall supply and demand balance. Let me explain: there are more and moreconsumers willing to make use of low rates and take out mortgage loans. They could servicethe debt, but they have no money for the down payment. It is common knowledge thata mortgage loan with a low down payment is risky, which means that people might lose theirhomes. The banking system would in turn have to deal with more underperforming loans,ultimately leading to a rise in interest rates for all. That is why it is in our interest to stem growthin this lending segment, in line with global practices.Therefore, we are discouraging banks from issuing such loans. Also, a housing savings projectis in the works and will hopefully gain support. This is when savings for housing become a downpayment. They would be kept in a special account, with the terms of a future mortgage loanto be fixed when opening this account. We have had a discussion on this subject, so hopefullythis arrangement will become standard practice.Focus should also be turning to the issue of long-term housing rent, an item that should possiblybe higher up on our agenda. This is in fact an alternative to mortgage loans, which enables thosewho cannot afford to take out a mortgage loan, but do need better housing conditions.Now let me say a few words about financial resources for the real sector. Corporates haveindeed been more active borrowers this year and credit portfolios have been on the rise. Havingsaid this, we realise that this growth has occurred on the back of the need to plug holes —to fight the consequences of the pandemic and lost revenue. The currently low interest rates stillhave the potential to encourage growth in lending — as a business growth strategy.Advancements in the stock market enable corporate customers to attract resources on morefavourable terms, which is key to long-term projects. We look to low inflation to carry positiveimplications for such long-term investment strategies.The financial market should meet the needs of any companies, large and small.We are championing both crowdfunding and factoring for small-sized companies, as wellas the Growth Sector of the Moscow Exchange.A lot of our efforts are now focused on so-called green finance — a business strategyof environmental responsibility and human capital development aiming to deliver on objectivesfar beyond profits. Companies embracing this strategy should enjoy financing on morefavourable terms.We all understand that advancing financial innovations are encouraging competition, in thisway giving impetus to a reduction in consumer and business costs.You are well aware of our recently launched and operating Faster Payments Systemand the marketplace. We are also exploring the potential launch of a digital ruble —we are indeed prepared for an open discussion on the issue and all its nuances. Hopefully,we will hold a dedicated digital ruble meeting with the senators before the end of this year so thatwe make the right assessment of prospects and risks a national digital currency would involve.Now, the last point I would like to comment on in a little more detail is an issue the Speaker 2 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
has already raised, and one we are very concerned about. This is the issue of stock marketdevelopment. This market is undergoing drastic and rapid changes. Retail investmentis becoming a mass phenomenon, with the numbers of retail investors growing very rapidly.In two years alone, the number of individuals who opened brokerage accounts rose more thanfourfold to 8.5 million people (equalling the number of accounts). This is a positive development,which we all acknowledge, and the real sector is poised to benefit from it. Still, our concernis about people. Do they really understand the risks of the stock market? Is there enoughtransparency in the operations of financial institutions and their offerings?It was only deposits that consumers dealt with until recently. The deposit is a fairly simpleand reliable product with up to 1.4m insurance coverage. At this juncture, however, depositinterest rates are in decline, as are other interest rates in the economy, including loan rates,which makes people try their hand at the stock market. With many of them being inexperienced,we can ill afford a stock market that has deceived their expectations.We have passed a non-qualified investor protection law, which we previously had a thoroughdiscussion about at the Federation Council. Everyone understood that the law should be enactedfast, and market players were deeply concerned then, which all resulted in the compromisedecision that the law would come into force in 2022. The discussion was extended,but at the time we assumed a smoother growth in the number of individuals entering the stockmarket. Ultimately, we came to have a really soft and compromise version of this law withdeferred enactment.Yet, we are seeing, in current market developments, intensive inflows of non-qualifiedinvestors — ordinary citizens entering the stock market. What we have to report now is thatfinancial companies, taking advantage of the transition period before entry into force of the law,are touting and hard-selling products unfit for non-qualified investors. When a deposit accountmatures, the customer is offered an alternative investment product instead of deposit extension.An inexperienced investor is flooded with the windy talk of capital protection, guaranteed yield,and the likes of structured bonds and structured instruments.Our view is that this situation calls for decisive action.The reasons for this are, regretfully,the misuse of consumer trust becoming commonplace, and offerings including structuredproducts of a complicated nature without guaranteed yield or return of investment — unlike state-guaranteed interest income.We therefore intend to launch, before the non-qualified investor protection law enters into force,so-called key information documents. A key information document is essentially a clear,transparent description of a financial product. These documents will lay out product specificsand risks. The seller will be obliged to make the investor — the so-called investor who is justan individual — acquainted with these documents.No less important is the law the Speaker has spoken about, setting forth the rules for sellinginvestment financial products. This is where the Federal Antimonopoly Service could stepin and make the difference. Misselling should be punishable.We are working on this draft law jointly with the Finance Ministry, and hopefully the FederationCouncil will in turn assist in passing it as soon as possible. A number of regulations may evenneed tightening there. Apart from this future law, it is our responsibility to protect investors fromproduct offerings or financial instruments whose risks they are unable to evaluate, from productsthey may buy at banks on the assumption that they are buying a sort of bank deposit. That is,it turns out that people do not realise that they become retail investors when they buy theseproducts and assume some risks. As I see it, urgent action is needed to rectify this situation.This is what we propose. The decision we are bringing up for discussion todayhas taken us quite some time to formulate given all the compromise solutions 3 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
we had to consider. We propose that direct restrictions be imposed on the sale to non-qualifiedinvestors of structured financial products, that is, products with leverage and those with a forexcomponent in an asset base.Once the testing system is fully operational and we are convinced of its efficiency, theserestrictions will be gradually lifted. We believe that at this juncture it is our responsibility to protectour investors. We might as well move forward some of the law regulations — those makingcustomers’ qualification tests mandatory — from April 2022 to at least 1 October 2021.At the time, we went along with market players and provided for a fairly comfortable and softtransition period in the law. We had an extensive discussion with Federation Council members.It stands to reason however that the major shift in the situation calls on us to take meaningfulaction to protect consumer rights.I admit that financial institutions themselves are unlikely to welcome this proposal, and theirfeedback will be negative. This is where we count on you to help, just as we have alwayscounted on your support of our initiatives related to efficient consumer right protectionin the financial market. The key reason for this is the nature of financial institutions: theyare financial intermediaries which should operate in the interest of businesses and consumers,just like the Speaker said. We therefore believe that now is the time for prompt and seriousdiscussion of this matter to make a decision.I am now handing over the floor to Sergey Shvetsov, who will enlarge on these and otherinitiatives I have presented. I truly wanted to make sure that my opening remarks highlight thismost acute problem — the need for protection of our consumers who are entering the stockmarket.Thank you for your time. 4 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
Nina Stoyanova: Banks and businessSpeech by Ms Nina Stoyanova, Deputy Governor and Head of the Banking Department of the Bulgarian National Bank, during the video conference "Banks and Business", organized by the Capital newspaper, 2 December 2020.** *I would like to welcome you to the video conference on Banking and Business, organized by theCapital newspaper.The banking sector is sending off a challenging year. In 2020, we witnessed the unprecedentedpandemic caused by COVID-19, the imposition of measures to prevent its spread, which led toan economic downturn, as well as to many difficulties facing business and the people we have todeal with on a daily basis. However, there were also positive events during the year, such as theinclusion of the Bulgarian lev in Monetary Mechanism II and the establishment of closecooperation between the Bulgarian National Bank (BNB) and the European Central Bank (ECB)in the field of banking supervision in July. 2020Banks in Bulgaria were able to quickly adapt to the new reality resulting from the pandemic andensure continuity in the provision of financial services to businesses and citizens. This becamepossible due to the high degree of electronicization and digitalization of the banking sector in thecountry. The focus of the activity of both the BNB as a regulator and the payment serviceproviders in 2020 was aimed at increasing the security of electronic payments with an emphasison card payment transactions on the Internet and the opening of access to payment accounts(the so-called “Open banking”). Both processes are expected to be completed by the end of2020 within the deadlines for the European Union.The package of digital finance documents published in September 2020 by the EuropeanCommission gives us a look at the future of payment services in the medium term. One of theimportant aspects in it should be the forthcoming revision of the Payment Services Directive(PSD 2) in 2021. A comprehensive assessment of the impact of the in-depth identification of thecustomer on the level of payment fraud is to be made. New requirements will be considered toreduce “social engineering” or “phishing” fraud, including a match requirement between thepayee’s name specified in the payment order and that of the account holder. Special emphasiswill be placed on the prevention of fraud in immediate payments.The possibilities for using the electronic identification and the solutions based on the certificationservices for fulfillment of the requirements for in-depth establishment of the client’s identity uponentering the account and initiating payment transactions are to be studied. The observed strongconvergence in the activities of payment institutions and electronic money companies justifiestheir inclusion in a single legal framework and the repeal of the Electronic Money Directive. Thescope of the directive may also include hitherto unregulated technical service providerssupporting payment services.Next, the future architecture of payment services in the European Union will be built onimmediate payments. In this regard, the Commission plans to assess the need for a statutoryobligation to participate in the SEPA scheme of the European Payments Committee forimmediate credit transfer in euros (SCT Inst.). To encourage the use of immediate payments,consideration is being given to requiring that immediate payment fees be no higher than ordinarycredit transfer fees.In Bulgaria, Borika AD, in close cooperation with the BNB as an operator of the real-time grosssettlement payment system (RINGS), is in an advanced stage of development of a project forimmediate payments in BGN, based on the requirements of the SEPA scheme for immediatecredit translations (SCT Inst.). The ambition of the company is in 2021 for the payment service1 / 2BIS central bankers' speeches
providers in the country to be able to provide their customers with immediate credit transfers inBGN.Interconnection and interoperability between the various payment systems providing clearing andsettlement is required to ensure cross-border reachability in the execution of immediate credittransfers in euro. In July 2020, the ECB announced its decision to introduce measures to ensurea trans-European scope of immediate payments in euro by the end of 2021. As a result, allpayment service providers that have joined the SCT Inst scheme will be required. and which areavailable in TARGET 2, become available either as a participant or as an eligible party (ie throughanother payment service provider that is a participant) and in the Instant Payment Service (TIPS)in TARGET 2. The service provides the possibility of settlement in other currencies and isexpected to make immediate payments in Swedish kroons in 2022 in TIPS.Part of the package of documents related to digital financial services published by the EuropeanCommission is a proposal for a Regulation on the operational sustainability of digitaltechnologies, which contains requirements for risk management related to information andcommunication technologies in the financial sector, a proposal for a Regulation oncryptocurrency markets; and a proposal for a Regulation on a Pilot Regulation of MarketInfrastructures Based on Distributed Registry Technology (DLT).The future development of regulations in the field of payment services is undoubtedly interestingand dynamic, but no less interesting and dynamic is the development in the current use ofpayment services in Bulgaria. The data for 2019 published by the ECB in September 2020,according to Regulation (EU) № 1409/2013 of the ECB on payment statistics, based on theinformation collected by the BNB for another year report a significant growth of payment servicesin Bulgaria. In this regard, some indicators can be highlighted, such as an increase in the numberof electronically initiated credit transfers by 17%, an increase in the number of card paymentsmade by 25% and others. Both the number and value of card payments initiated via the Internetincreased in 2019 compared to 2018 by 17%. A significant increase is observed in electronicmoney payments,The contraction of economic activity due to the pandemic crisis is expected to affect trafficthrough the RINGS and TARGET2-BNB systems, which reported a decline in the total number ofprocessed payments for the second quarter of 2020 compared to the same period in 2019,respectively by 17 % for RINGS and 28% for TARGET2-BNB. Despite the initial negative effect ofthe pandemic in the third quarter of 2020, there is a recovery and increase in the number ofpayments made. The increase in payments in the third compared to the second quarter of 2020was 14% for the number and 20% for the RINGS value and 23% for the number and 31% for theTARGET2-BNB value, respectively. Both customer and interbank payments grew.I wish interesting and fruitful work to the participants in the videoconference.2 / 2BIS central bankers' speeches
I would like to thank Stéphane Lavoie, James MacGee and Jonathan Witmer for their help in preparing this speech.  Not for publication before December 10, 2020 1:30 pm Eastern Time      Remarks by Paul Beaudry Deputy Governor Fredericton, New Brunswick, Moncton, New Brunswick, Saint John, New Brunswick December 10, 2020 Delivered virtually   Our quantitative easing operations: looking under the hood Introduction Good afternoon and thank you very much for the kind introduction, John.  I’m really pleased to have the opportunity to talk with all of you today—even if we are doing so virtually and from opposite coasts. I’m now a resident of Canada’s west coast, but I hold fond memories of time spent vacationing in the Maritimes from my home town of Québec.   As you know, the Bank made the decision yesterday to maintain our target for the overnight rate at 0.25 percent, and we’ll spend some time discussing that later. But first, I want to talk about some of our actions to address COVID-19 and the immense challenges this pandemic poses to the financial well-being of Canadians. Since the pandemic hit in March, we have taken swift and decisive actions to help Canadian households and businesses bridge this short-term crisis. But we are also concerned with providing a strong foundation for longer-term recovery. In the face of the pandemic, we lowered our policy interest rate to 0.25 percent to ensure lower borrowing costs for households and businesses. We have committed to maintaining our policy rate at the current level until our inflation objective is achieved. We also launched nearly a dozen liquidity facilities and asset purchase programs to keep markets functioning and credit flowing as well as to allow interest rate cuts to work their way through the economy. 
 - 2 - Today, I’ll discuss our main large-scale asset purchase program—the Government of Canada Bond Purchase Program1—in greater detail. We commonly refer to this program as quantitative easing. What’s important to remember about this and other programs is that they are all grounded in the same policy framework that has served Canada well for years. Each of our actions has been designed to return the economy toward its full capacity to support our 2 percent inflation target. With this in mind, I would like to clarify some of the mechanics of and potential misinterpretations about our quantitative easing—or QE—program. When we conduct QE, the Bank purchases bonds in the secondary market that were previously issued by the Government of Canada. This program has expanded our balance sheet, which has generated considerable attention and some concern.   The most common questions we get are: How do we buy these assets? How do we pay for them? Are we financing the federal government’s debt? And, are we in danger of igniting high inflation through this process? So let’s take some time to talk about QE: what it does, what it doesn’t do, and how it works. Because monetary policy works best when it’s well understood. What quantitative easing does As I just mentioned, the Bank’s primary monetary policy goal is to achieve our 2 percent inflation target on a sustainable basis. To do that, we strive to keep the economy’s production as close to capacity as possible. This is particularly important in times like these, when inflation is well below target and unemployment is high. Our policy interest rate is the overnight rate. It is our main policy tool in normal times. The overnight rate has a direct impact on the cost of borrowing over very short terms. Increases or decreases in the policy rate also shape the market’s expectations of future overnight rates. In turn, this affects longer-term borrowing and lending rates. Through this channel, the Bank influences the cost of credit for Canadian households and businesses. This influences spending and investment decisions—and, ultimately, inflation.   But the policy rate isn’t the only way we can affect the longer-term interest rates that matter to Canadians. When we can no longer reduce our policy rate, we need to dig deeper into our tool kit if we want to further stimulate the economy. One important instrument in our extended tool kit is QE, so let me begin by explaining how QE affects interest rates. When the Bank buys government bonds of a given maturity, it bids up their price. This, in turn, lowers the rate of interest that the bond pays to its holders. When the interest rate on government bonds is lower, this transmits itself to other interest rates, such as                                             1 For more information, see the Bank’s Government of Canada Bond Purchase Program web page. 
 - 3 - those on mortgages and corporate loans. This stimulates more borrowing and spending, which helps inflation move closer to the 2 percent inflation target. So, as you can see, even when the overnight rate can no longer be reduced, the Bank can still affect longer-term interest rates by using QE.  How quantitative easing works Let’s turn our attention now to the mechanics of QE. Every week, the Government of Canada sells bonds to financial institutions—mostly commercial banks—that have been approved to participate in their auctions. Under QE, the Bank buys these bonds from auction participants, not directly from the government.  The Bank conducts QE operations through a reverse auction. When you think of an auction, you probably imagine someone selling goods, with people bidding to purchase them. When we conduct QE, we call it a reverse auction because it’s the opposite: we hold an auction to buy—not sell—government bonds.  We announce our intention to buy a certain quantity of bonds on a given day. We then receive offers from market participants who wish to sell us some of the bonds they hold. The bidding process is competitive, and we typically receive many more offers to sell than we are willing to buy. This is good because it means we can purchase bonds that are offered at the lowest price.  We are currently buying a minimum of $4 billion a week of bonds through this process. Overall, we have purchased slightly more than $180 billion since the program was launched in March. That’s a big number. And it’s true that our QE program and other asset purchases led to a substantial increase in the Bank’s balance sheet. But despite all the purchases we’ve made, it is worth noting that the value of the assets we hold for the size of the Canadian economy remains relatively low by international standards—roughly two-thirds of that of the Bank of England or US Federal Reserve (Chart 1). 
 - 4 - Chart 1: The Bank of Canada’s balance sheet remains relatively low  Sources: Bank of Canada, Bloomberg Finance L.P., national sources via Haver Analytics and Bank of Canada calculations Last observation: 2020Q3  Of course, when we buy these bonds through our auction, we need to pay for them. But we don’t print new bank notes to do so.  Rather, we pay for them by issuing a particular form of liability. For anyone who knows the basic principles of accounting, you know our balance sheet has to, well, balance. The bonds we purchase become an asset for us, so we need a liability on the other side to pay for them.  Here’s an example. If we buy $100 million of government bonds from Bank A, we pay for them by issuing what are called settlement balances. These appear as deposits with the Bank of Canada. Just like commercial banks consider deposits as a liability that they owe to their clients, settlement balances are a liability the Bank of Canada owes to the commercial banks. We pay interest on them at our deposit rate, which moves one-for-one with our policy interest rate.  So to recap, when we perform our QE operations, we buy government bonds from financial institutions and issue liabilities—in the form of settlement balances—to pay for them.  It’s important to note here that settlement balances are a normal part of central banking operations. Being able to issue settlement balances is a privilege that only central banks 02040608005010015020072010201320162019%%Bank of Japan (left scale)Bank of Canada (right scale)US Federal Reserve (right scale)European Central Bank (right scale)Bank of England (right scale)Reserve Bank of Australia (right scale)Central bank total assets as a percentage of a four-quarter average of GrossDomestic Product, quarterly data
 - 5 - have. We use this ability carefully to fulfill our mandate of promoting the economic and financial welfare of Canada and Canadians.  Questions about quantitative easing I’ll be the first to admit that the mechanics of quantitative easing can be hard to wrap your head around.  So I’d like to turn my attention now to the questions I raised earlier—what the public and some officials have asked us to explain about QE. The first is the impression that we’re activating the printing press and issuing bank notes to buy government bonds. Are we printing cash? Like a lot of central banks, the Bank of Canada moved away many years ago from setting the amount of cash in the economy. Instead, we set the overnight interest rate and let households and businesses decide how much cash they need to conduct their transactions.    When we conduct QE, as I have explained, we buy government bonds and pay for them by issuing a variable interest rate liability in the form of settlement balances. Just like anyone else who takes on debt, we compensate the holders by paying interest on these balances. And as our policy rate changes, so does the interest rate we pay on settlement balances. When we carry out QE, our balance sheet expands, but the number of bank notes in circulation does not.   Is the Bank financing the federal government’s debt? Another important point is that QE does not release the government from its liabilities. We are not financing government spending at no cost, nor are we making the government’s debt disappear.    There is a big difference between financing the government and influencing the cost of government financing. Through QE, the Bank of Canada is doing the latter—we are lowering the cost of borrowing for the government. But most importantly, we are lowering the cost of borrowing for everyone in the economy.   To put it simply: we are not providing a free lunch for the government. The government will have to repay the bonds that we purchase through our QE program when they reach maturity.  I should note that QE operations may result in a profit or loss for the Bank because of the difference in interest rates between our borrowing cost and the return on government bonds. Any profit or loss arising from our QE operations is passed on to the government, as part of our regular remittance. However, it’s important to state that increasing revenue is not the primary goal of these operations. The sole purpose of QE is to reduce the cost of borrowing for everyone in Canada, so we can help people get back to work and achieve our inflation target.  Will QE cause high inflation? So let’s move on now to my third and final point of clarification. Since we started QE, I’ve heard and read a lot about the risk of causing excessive inflation. It is true that QE 
 - 6 - is designed to increase our current low level of inflation. That’s the whole point—to get us back near our 2 percent target. But rest assured we will not overuse QE and overshoot our 1 to 3 percent target range for inflation. The exit strategy for our QE program is tied to our inflation goals.  We will pursue quantitative easing until our economic recovery is well underway. At that point we will have three different options.  Once the amount of purchases has been reduced, the first option would be to stabilize the level of assets on our balance sheet by reinvesting any proceeds from maturing assets into new ones. This would maintain—but not increase—the level of stimulus.  The second option would be to allow maturing assets to roll off the balance sheet and not reinvest the proceeds.  The third option would be to actively sell the assets, thus quickly reducing our balance sheet. This option would be the most aggressive for reducing the level of stimulus. Several central banks that used QE during the global financial crisis focused on the first two options, in a careful sequence. Our choice between the different options would depend on our outlook for the evolution of inflation.  How we’ve done so far The good news is that our efforts in the face of COVID-19 have had their intended effect. Financial markets are functioning much better than they were when we began our policy actions in March. Our balance sheet has been stable since July, largely due to reduced use of certain programs (Chart 2).   Chart 2: The Bank of Canada’s balance sheet size has stabilized  Source: Bank of Canada Last observation: October 21, 2020 0100200300400500600JanFebMarAprMayJunJulAugSepOctCan$ billlionsSecurities purchased under resale agreementsGovernment of Canada bondsTreasury billsBankers’ acceptancesAll other assetsBank of Canada total assets, weekly data
 - 7 - And our bond purchases have recently been recalibrated. We have adjusted our QE program to focus its impact on longer-term interest rates that matter for Canadians. We are buying fewer bonds at shorter maturities and more at longer maturities, where the benefit for Canadian households and business is greater. For example, when we buy more five-year bonds, this lowers the five-year lending rates on loans for households and businesses. Since this recalibration will increase the impact of each dollar spent in our QE program, we recently reduced our minimum weekly purchases from $5 billion to $4 billion. All of this allows us to be more efficient with our balance sheet, while continuing to provide at least as much monetary stimulus. Yesterday’s decision Let me conclude by spending a few minutes to provide some context for and insight into our policy decision yesterday. We decided to maintain the level of the policy interest rate at 25 basis points and continue asset purchases at a minimum of $4 billion weekly in our QE program.  Foremost on our minds heading into the decision were recent developments across a few dimensions—how things have transpired to date, how things look in the near term and how things are shaping up further out.  Let me briefly discuss each in turn.  Looking back on developments to date, last week’s publication of Canada’s  National Accounts for the third quarter of 2020 confirmed our expectation that a sharp rebound would take place as the economy reopened, following the precipitous decline in activity in the second quarter. Indeed, the economy grew rapidly, at close to 9 percent in the third quarter, just a bit below the 10 percent growth we had expected in our October Monetary Policy Report (MPR). The overall level of economic activity remains largely on track with our expectations, reflecting some historical revisions to gross domestic product and a little more momentum heading into the fourth quarter than we anticipated in October. It’s also worth noting that stronger global demand is pushing up prices for most commodities, including oil.  A second aspect of our view was that this sharp rebound would give way to a longer, slower phase of the economic recovery. We’ve called this the recuperation phase. And indeed, more recent data suggest this part of our view is also unfolding largely as expected.  The rising incidence of COVID-19 cases across the country and the tightening of restrictions on activity in response are exacerbating this dynamic. The second wave is clearly underway, here in Canada and globally. This will weigh on economic activity in the first quarter of 2021 and represents an important downside risk further out, if the situation becomes much worse. As we noted in yesterday’s decision, the federal government’s recently announced measures should help maintain household and business incomes during this second wave of the pandemic and support the recovery.   
 - 8 - Looking further out, the picture is more reassuring—recent positive news on vaccines represents an upside risk to the outlook, although uncertainty remains around how they will be rolled out, in Canada and globally. So that sets the scene. Going forward, both downside and upside risks to inflation are in play. For the Bank, that means being prepared to respond in either direction. Thankfully, we have the tools to do so.  Should things take a more persistent turn for the worse, we have a range of options at our disposal to provide additional monetary stimulus. This could include increasing the stimulus power of our QE program, or it could involve targeting specific points in the yield curve, otherwise known as yield-curve control. It could also include reassessing the effective lower bound, which would allow for the possibility of a lower—but still positive—policy rate. In theory, negative interest rates remain in the Bank’s tool kit. But we’ve been clear that, barring a dramatically different set of circumstances, we don’t think negative rates would be productive in a Canadian context. What about options for responding to the upside? The faster people get vaccinated and more people get back to work in contact-sensitive sectors, the more quickly the recovery could unfold. Such an outcome would be welcome news. In that context, we may need to re-examine the amount of stimulus needed to achieve our inflation target. Earlier in my speech, I illustrated how we could withdraw stimulus from our QE program when the time comes.   What we do know today is that Canada’s economic recovery will continue to require extraordinary monetary policy support. We have been clear that we will hold our policy rate at its effective lower bound until economic slack is absorbed, so that the 2 percent inflation target is sustainably achieved. As of our October MPR, that doesn’t happen until into 2023. We have not yet done a full analysis of all new information to shift that assessment. To reinforce our commitment and keep interest rates low across the yield curve, the Bank will continue the QE program until the recovery is well underway and will adjust it as required to help bring inflation back to target on a sustainable basis.  Whatever the outcome, the Bank remains committed to providing the monetary policy stimulus needed to support the recovery and achieve the inflation objective.  
Guo Shuqing: FinTech developments, challenges and supervisionin ChinaVideo speech by Mr Guo Shuqing, Party Secretary and Deputy Governor of the People's Bank ofChina and CBIRC Chairman, at the Singapore FinTech Festival (SFF) 2020, 8 December 2020.*   *   *Ladies and gentlemen, dear friends,It is a great pleasure to attend the Singapore FinTech Fesitval 2020. I would like to share thelatest FinTech developments in China and some of our observations.First, updates on FinTech developments in China.Over recent years, FinTech has been developing rapidly and robustly in China. Financialinstitutions made continued efforts to promote digital transformation. Financial products and toolsbecame more diversified, and financial services more efficient and inclusive.With wide coverage of e-payment, in particular mobile payment, basic financial services are nowavailable across the whole country. Even in the most remote areas, every adult has his or herown bank account. China now ranks high in terms of the coverage and volume of mobilepayments. This enables real time processing of deposit, withdrawal and remittance. Onlineshopping is booming, providing more convenience to daily life.Digital credit has fundamentally improved the financial services for micro and small enterprises,the self-employed and farmers. Banks use big data for smart risk management, which reducedreliance on collateral and made loans more accessible. By the end of October this year, microand small firms with banking credit have reached 27 million, loans for these firms and the self-employed grew by over 30% year on year, and loans to farmers grew by 14.3%.Digitalisation remarkably expanded insurance’s coverage. In China, basic pension has covered 1billion people, and basic medical insurance has covered more than 1.3 billion, with cross-province fee settlement achieved. By video and remote authentication, key parts of the insurancebusiness have been moved online. In the first half of this year, internet life insurance premiumgrew by 12.2% year on year, internet property insurance companies’ premium grew by 44.2%.Financial digitalisation has made huge contribution to poverty alleviation. With multiple digitaltools, financial institutions can well target their funding support to poor households. By the end ofSeptember this year, small loans for poverty alleviation totaled 504 billion yuan, benefiting 12million households. Financial institutions also set up online platforms to connect producers withconsumers. Through online marketing, credit reference, guarantee and payments, thoseplatforms help poor households sell their agricultural products to everywhere.FinTech also strongly supports our fight against Covid-19. Since its outbreak, financialinstitutions rapidly optimized their mobile Apps and other on-line services. They provided safeand convenient ‘at home’ financial products, to make sure basic financial services remainavailable. Many institutions offered online fast tracks, which greatly enhanced service efficiencyand effectiveness, and supported rapid economic recovery.Second, the experience and lessons of FinTech.The developments of our laws, rules and regulations on FinTech were just like “feeling the stoneswhile crossing the river”. We met someproblems, learned lessons and gained experience. Here Iwould like to mention four cases. 1 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
The first case is the P2P. It was originally supposed to be just an information intermediary.However in practice, many P2P platforms engaged in lending and wealth management. For thepast 14 years, the total number of P2P was over 10 thousand in China. At the peak, there wereover 5000 companies operating at the same time. The annual trading volume were about 3 trillionyuan. The NPLs and losses were very high. By mid-November, all the operating P2P platformshave been closed down.The second case is the third-party payment platforms. In the past, some third-party paymentcompanies provided investment service for customers’ online shopping reserve funds. The yieldwas much higher than banking deposits, and money could be redeemed anytime. Therefore, itgreatly rattled the banking deposits and asset management business. Such investment was verymuch like money market mutual fund (MMMF) products, but was unregulated to the same extent.Thus, it might violate laws, rules and even potentially engage in money laundering. Now, thosepayment companies have been asked to deposit the reserve funds with the central bank, and therelated investment has been put under supervision.The third case is the internet financial companies. Some of them tended to induce overspendingthrough various scenarios and over-marketing of loans or overdraft. They even offered loans tostudents without repayment abilities. When default occurred, they pursued coercive loancollection, which caused many social problems. Hence, we insist on applying unified regulationby business activities, and stand firmly against regulatory arbitrage.The fourth case is the data privacy. Some tech companies used their market advantage toimproperly collect, use and even sell user data. Without users’ authorization, those activitiesseriously violate business interests and individual privacy. Chinese government has made effortsto plug the holes. The Civil Code provides legal protection for individual information. The IndividualInformation Protection Law is also being drafted. Financial data security regulation is beingdeveloped by the regulators. All these aim to build an effective protection and prevent data leakand abuse.Third, some issues need to be further discussed.Facing the rapid growth of FinTech, we will adopt a positive and prudent approach. We willencourage innovation while enhancing risk control, so as to address the new problems andchallenges.Firstly, paying high attention to cyber security. At present, over 90% of China’s bankingtransactions have moved online. Compared with conventional risks, cyber risks spread fasterand wider with impacts greater. Cyber security emergencies also call for better contingencyresponse and management.Secondly, promoting fair market competition. FinTech is a “winner takes all” industry. With theadvantage of data monopoly, BigTech firms tend to hinder fair competition and seek excessprofits. Traditional anti-monopoly laws focus on Cartel, market abuse and operator concentration.However, FinTech industry leads to many new phenomena and problems. We might need to paymore attention to the following questions.a) Have the BigTech firms blocked newcomers;b) have they collected data improperly;c) have they refused to disclose information that should be made public;d) have they engaged in conducts misleading users and consumers?Thirdly, watching out for the “too big to fail”. Now the mircropayment market is dominated by a 2 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
few tech companies. They have the feature of being key financial infrastructures with publicinterest at stake. Besides, some BigTechs operate cross-sector businesses, with financial andtechnology activities under one roof. It is necessary to closely follow the spillover of thosecomplex risks, and take timely and targeted measures to prevent new systemic risks.Fourthly, clarifying data ownership. Chinese government has recognized data as a productionfactor together with labor, capital and technology. And clear ownership is fundamental to market-based allocation and pricing of data. At present, few jurisdictions have specified the ownership ofdata property, and BigTechs have de facto control over data. It is necessary to clarify data rightsof different parties soon, and improve data flow and pricing mechanism. It is also important tofully and fairly utilize data, and protect the lawful interests of all players.Fifthly, strengthening international coordination for cross-border data flow. China has recently putforward the Global Data Security Initiative, calling for respect of sovereignty, jurisdiction and datasecurity management rights. It is a basic principle to balance development and security. And wewill enhance cross-border coordination to jointly promote a more open, fair and non-discriminatory business environment.Ladies and gentlemen,The booming digital economy connects us more closely than ever before. Let’s join handstogether to promote the healthy development of FinTech.To conclude, I wish this event a great success. And wish you all good health.Thank you! 3 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
Ariff Ali: Launch of the Pacific Insurance and Climate AdaptationProgrammeSpecial address by Mr Ariff Ali, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the official Launch of thePacific Insurance and Climate Adaptation Programme, Suva, 2 December 2020.*   *   *His Excellency, the New Zealand High Commissioner to Fiji, Mr Jonathan Curr;Mr Levan Bouadze, UNDP Resident Representative;Invited Guests; Ladies and Gentlemen.A very good morning to you all.IntroductionAs you are all aware, the UN World Risk Report places Fiji and a number of Pacific islandcountries as the most vulnerable countries to natural disasters in the World, and the ongoingeffects of climate change are likely to eventuate in more frequent and intense events. We alsoknow the significant impact these events have had, and will have on our economy and on ourcommunities, especially the most vulnerable.Most of you may not know that my first real employment was as a Trainee at the FijiMeteorological Department. I therefore have a very good understanding of the prerequisite orconditions under which a tropical cyclone is formed. Given the current high temperatures, it is awarning sign that we need to prepare for the cyclone season which has already started.Last week, we released the latest economic projection for Fiji with a slight improvement to theforecasted contraction in the economy for 2020 from 21.7% to 19.0%. This will be the worstrecession on record for Fiji, and the last thing the Fijian economy needs right now is to be hit byanother natural disaster. Our forecast for a recovery in 2021 assumes no major natural disasterand at the same time opening of international borders for tourism towards the latter half of nextyear.The Fijian Government over the years has funded rehabilitation work post natural disaster in thehundreds of millions of dollars. As the frequency and intensity of natural disasters increase, sotoo does the need for Government to build on sustainable resilience measures. Leading up toand during the COP23, there have been a lot of discussions on climate change, disaster riskreduction and parametric insurance.I am therefore very pleased that we have moved a step further from just discussing and planningas we launch the Pacific Insurance and Climate Adaption Programme today.This means that we will rely less on re-active measures and focus on an initiative that buildsresilience by providing agile and immediate post-disaster financing through market led disasterrisk financing instruments. This programme fulfils a long felt need of the Pacific island countries,aims to plug a market gap and address a persistent development challenge by developing,piloting and scaling market-based parametric insurance solutions.Acknowledge PFIP’s WorkI wish to acknowledge with sincere gratitude, the commitment and ongoing assistance of thePacific Financial Inclusion Programme (PFIP), jointly implemented by the United Nations CapitalDevelopment Fund (UNCDF) and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) to our 1 / 2BIS central bankers' speeches
country and to the region that has enabled us to be at the forefront of significant developments infinancial inclusion. The financial and technical assistance by PFIP has continued to strengthenthe platform we have for financial inclusion, innovative insurance solutions, capacity building andknowledge sharing.I am pleased to highlight that our collaboration with the PFIP was established in 2009 after whichFiji’s first national financial inclusion strategy was also adopted. Since then, our collaborativeapproach, with the set-up of the National Financial Inclusion Taskforce and its four workinggroups, has worked well for us in providing a platform for effective collaboration between allstakeholders.Over the years, we have partnered with PFIP on a number of initiatives including the piloting andlaunch of the bundled micro insurance product with the active participation of the private sector,which has resulted in more than doubling of the insurance penetration rate in Fiji, in the pastthree years.ConclusionI wish to also convey my gratitude to the Governments of New Zealand and Australia for theirfinancial support and collaboration with PFIP for this initiative.Finally, I would like to congratulate UNCDF, UNDP and the UN University on the launch of thisnew programme today. The Reserve Bank of Fiji fully supports this initiative, as it aims to fulfil along-pending need and aspiration of Fiji and our neighboring Pacific countries, a region prone tonatural disasters which has long lasting impacts on our economic growth.We look forward to continued collaboration under the newly launched PICA programme andsharing the many benefits that the programme will bring to our Pacific region.Vinaka. 2 / 2BIS central bankers' speeches
Benjamin E Diokno: Virtual launch of the Credit Risk Database(CRD) projectSpeech by Mr Benjamin E Diokno, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the centralbank of the Philippines), at the virtual launch of the Credit Risk Database (CRD) project, 9December 2020.*   *   *Ms. Kawabuchi Kiyo, Senior Representative of JICA, officers of the CRD project participatingbanks, ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon!I am pleased to have this virtual launch today. As you may know, MSMEs are the backbone of oureconomy. They account for 99.5 percent of business enterprises in the country and areresponsible for two-thirds of its total employment.  But, the lack of access to credit remains a major barrier to the further development andsustainability of MSMEs. As of end-December 2019 or prior to the onset of the COVID-19pandemic, MSME loans of the Philippine banking system only account for 8.8 percent of totalbusiness loans and 6.1 percent of total loans.This is mainly attributed to two factors. First, MSMEs are often reluctant to approach banks dueto lack of credit history and acceptable collateral typically required for loan application. Second,banks tend to perceive MSMEs in general as high-risk due to limited understanding and visibilityinto this market.As they navigate through the pandemic, MSMEs have been heavily devastated. During thelockdowns implemented to curb the spread of COVID-19, most MSMEs closed totally and someoperated on a highly limited basis.The harsh reality is that the pandemic added to the existing challenges encountered by MSMEsand therefore undermine progress towards inclusive economic growth.Clearly, both the government and private sector should support to MSMEs to help them withstandthis crisis and eventually recover and thrive beyond this pandemic.As such, it is timely that the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP) and the Japan InternationalCooperation Agency (JICA) have embarked on a project to establish a Credit Risk Database(CRD) for small and medium enterprises (SMEs).As a brief background, the feasibility study on the establishment of a CRD here in the Philippineswas conducted in 2016 by JICA and the Department of Finance.The study showed encouraging results and the project became a joint initiative of the BSP andJICA under a Technical Cooperation Program between the Philippines and Japan from 2019 to2022. Today, we are officially launching the CRD project.The project aims to improve access to finance among SMEs by promoting risk-based lendingwhich uses credit scoring models to assess the capacity of SMEs to repay their loan.The project is a tangible step in building a sustainable financing ecosystem for SMEs.Banks, on the other hand, will benefit from the robust credit scoring models built on the databaseto supplement or to validate their internal scoring models. This will particularly be useful to thosewithout a credit scoring model. The CRD will enhance the credit risk management system ofbanks. 1 / 2BIS central bankers' speeches
As we usher in the new economy and steer towards a strong post-pandemic economic recovery,we expect the CRD to contribute to providing stimulus for inclusive economic development. Asthe CRD will augment the access of SMEs to credit, it will lead to their enhanced productivity andcompetitiveness and also generate much-needed jobs and source of income for many Filipinos.Indeed, the project will provide long-term support to SMEs.I want to thank the Government of Japan and JICA for their commitment towards socio-economicdevelopment in the Philippines.I also wish to thank the 17 pioneer participating banks : Land Bank of the Philippines,Development Bank of the Philippines, Security Bank, Rizal Commercial Banking Corporation,Philippine Business Bank, Sterling Bank of Asia, China Bank Savings, Malayan Bank, PhilippineSavings Bank, UCPB Savings Bank, Producers Savings Bank, Queen City Development Bank,Wealthbank, Sun Savings Bank, AllBank, CARD SME Bank and First Consolidated Bank.Their participation and commitment in the CRD project is crucial in the development of thesector.MSMEs have taken steps to continue their businesses amid the pandemic. The BSP, incooperation with JICA and the Philippine financial institutions, will do our part. Together, we willcreate a sustainable and vibrant financing ecosystem in the country.Thank you and mabuhay! 2 / 2BIS central bankers' speeches
Welcome addressIgnazio Visco Governor of the Bank of ItalyBank of Italy / CEPR / EIEF conference on “Ownership, Governance, Management and Firm Performance” Online event, 21-22 December 2020• It is my pleasure to open this conference on “Ownership, Governance, Management and Firm Performance” organised by the Bank of Italy together with the Centre for Economic Policy Research and the Einaudi Institute for Economics and Finance. This conference bears witness to the Bank of Italy’s interest in productivity, the main force behind aggregate economic growth and welfare improvements.• The slowdown of labour productivity observed since the financial crisis of 2008-09  clearly has a global dimension. Many, possibly complementary, explanations of this phenomenon have been advanced. Demographic developments and the evolution of technical change are certainly crucial determinants of the trends in capital intensity and total factor productivity. On the demand side, the imbalances between saving and investment propensities fuelled by financial instability and protracted uncertainty are often mentioned as culprits of the possible entry into a secular stagnation mode.• Against the background provided by the most likely reasons behind this sluggish trend, the policy debate has focused on the identification of possible remedies to contrast it. Increasing and improving physical infrastructures, investing in knowledge and skills development, favouring innovation through the adoption of new technologies and supporting the reallocation of resources between firms and sectors are all triggers than can help to revitalise our economies. And even if the choice of whether and how to become more efficient is ultimately made at the firm level, there is no question that the public sector plays a key role in creating an adequate environment for “doing business”.• However, we are realising more and more that the evolution of total factor productivity depends on how production is organised, how technology is adopted, and how different skills are dynamically combined. Therefore, corporate governance and management functions are key ingredients of the production process. It is not surprising that much more attention has recently been devoted to their role in determining firm performance and, eventually, contributing to economic growth. 
2In this respect some of the issues discussed in this conference seem to me to be especially important:– Ownership and governance shape attitudes toward risk, affecting the propensity to invest and innovate as well as access to external finance, with significant effects on firm size. They also define the “incentive scheme” under which economic agents operate within firms. Indeed, one research topic that has received wide scholarly attention is family ownership. In general, family firms are characterised by lower agency exchanges and conflicts, resulting, on one side, in more information sharing between owners and managers and yet, on the other side, in more conservative decisions, often leading to less innovation and lower firm growth.– Entrepreneurs play a key role, especially in new businesses, in introducing new products, processes and organisational approaches. However, they face the difficult task of choosing the appropriate managers. The potentially limited pool of talented managers can make for a lack of managerial skills, which is often behind the poor performance of even promising firms.– Modern management practices deal with the design of monitoring and incentive schemes that are conducive to an efficient organisational structure. Much of the productivity gaps, across firms both within and between countries, has recently been attributed to differences in management practices. What has, perhaps surprisingly, emerged is that their quantitative effects are comparable to those brought about by differences in R&D investments, in the adoption of information and communication technologies or in the level of education and skills of employees.• These issues require special attention from both policy-makers and the academic community and are particularly relevant for the Italian economy. We know how extraordinarily large the number of small and very small enterprises in Italy is.  We also know that the share of Italian family-owned businesses is similar to that of other European countries. However, the incidence of family management is remarkably higher in Italy. In the selection of managers, family background, social and political connections often appear to hold more weight than competence, managerial skills and education. This also tends to hamper corporate performance due to the lack of openness to external talent and modern management practices, leading to lower firm efficiency and weak propensity to innovate.• The recent pandemic – a human tragedy with enormous costs for the economy and society at large – has impacted firms by inducing substantial and rapid changes in the business environment and in their activity. Even if we still do not have a sufficient understanding of the lasting effects on sectors of activity and production patterns, there is no question that companies with a greater ability to adapt and swiftly re-deploy resources will experience higher chances of survival. In these extremely uncertain times, intangible capabilities – such as creativity, innovative thinking, and 
23openness to change – will be crucial factors, highlighting the central importance of managers in leading the firm through the storm. There is indeed some very recent evidence to show that better-managed Italian firms have been able to adjust their organisational processes and activities more rapidly, thus containing the economic losses caused by the pandemic.• I would finally observe that drawing policy implications in the field of corporate governance is very difficult. Policy makers can affect the general environment in which firms invest and produce, but private firms operating in a market economy independently take corporate governance decisions. The productivity-enhancing effects of good entrepreneurs and managers hinge on there being a sufficient pool of skilled individuals in the population at large. Therefore, investing in human capital may provide firms with the edge needed to excel in challenging environments. However, the ability of both firms and individuals to grow and emerge needs to be adequately fuelled. In this respect, market and labour regulation, the organisational culture and the recognition received by workers for their efforts and merit play a crucial role in providing incentives to invest in human capital. More generally, they foster a more efficient allocation of talent in the economy, with positive welfare effects for the economy as a whole.• The studies included in the programme address many of these key issues. The conference will also cover other topics of long-standing interest in the field, such as the increasingly debated importance of promoting female participation in leadership positions. The first invited lecture, in particular, will overview the critical points in pursuing gender diversity on corporate boards and its implications for the future of the economy. The second invited lecture will discuss the trends emerging in the labour market, focusing on the rising importance given to, among the other talents required of managers, cognitive skills and the ability to coordinate the activities of their staff.• Let me conclude by thanking the organisers and the scientific committee for having put together such a rich and interesting programme and let me welcome the lecturers, presenters, moderators and all the other participants to this event. Although the circumstances only allow for a “virtual” format of the conference,  I wish you all fruitful interactions and thought-provoking discussions during these two days.
Designed and printed by the Printing and Publishing Division of the Bank of Italy
Luljeta Minxhozi: Covid-19 - the impact on the economy and centralbank policiesWelcome address by Ms Luljeta Minxhozi, First Deputy Governor of the Bank of Albania, to theVirtual Conference of the Bank of Albania “Covid-19: The Impact on the Economy and CentralBank Policies”, 29 October 2020.*   *   *Dear Guests,Ladies and Gentlemen,For a few years now, the Bank of Albania and the Institute of Global Affairs (IGA) of the LSE havebeen co-organizing a series of joint conferences. These annual events are aimed at encouragingan open discussion amongst academics and policymakers, in order to promote new thinking andpolicy-based approaches to the most pressing challenges we face.The Bank of Albania is proud to associate itself with the Institute of Global Affairs, an institutewhich is positioned as a leading academic center for exploring research-based strategicapproaches to policy challenges. On its behalf, the Bank of Albania strives to adopt the emergingacademic consensus, while tailoring it to the idiosyncrasies of the Albanian economy and itsfinancial markets.Being said that, it is a special my pleasure to address this conference, focused on “Covid-19:The Impact on the Economy and Central Bank Policies”.The ongoing pandemic has the undoubted potential to re-shape our way of life for the foreseeablefuture. As the health emergency is still unfolding, its implications might have far-reaching impactsin our social and economic fabric. For policy-making institutions, particularly in emergingeconomies, the challenge to fulfill key objectives like price stability, sustainable growth andfinancial stability, is driving them into uncharted operational territory.I take this opportunity to touch upon some of the most pressing issues at stake.***Dear Guests,Life with the Sars-Cov2 virus continues to be an unprecedented health and social challenge.Fortunately, health institutions today know more about the virus and which policies serve best tocontain it. Unfortunately, we are still far from a definite and practical epidemiological solution.Against this background, the economic fallout from the pandemic is still unfolding. The strictlockdown in the second quarter paved the way towards a synchronized global recession; theeconomic activity in most emerging and advanced economies shrunk rapidly whileunemployment jumped sharply. However, the easing of lockdown measures in the third quarterand the quick deployment of both fiscal and monetary policies at national level, have started topull up the global economy from the brink of collapse.The scale of the two key support measures at national level, fiscal and monetary policy, reachedunprecedented levels in many economies, not seen even during the recent global crisis of 2008.The aggregate fiscal support at global level has reached almost 12 trillion USD. Key policy rateshave declined to zero and in some cases have pushed through that boundary and into negativeterritory. Old-style central bank balance-sheet expansion coupled to ever higher risk-taking,operations that were considered unthinkable until a decade ago, have become almost a 1 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
mainstream instruments.The pandemic has tested the resilience of the Albanian economy and of our banking system. Ithas put an immense social and financial strain on households and businesses and has forcedthe authorities to act swiftly to address the health crisis and to introduce major policy initiatives inorder to contain its impact.The Bank of Albania has used a wide range of policies to support financial activity and aggregatedemand. We reduced the policy rate to a historical low of 0.5% and increased the amount ofliquidity injected into the system. These actions were aimed at reducing the debt servicing costsacross the economy and at supporting continued financial intermediation. In addition, in closeconsultation with the banking industry, we applied targeted – though temporary – regulatoryreliefs, designed to encourage both the temporary deferral of loan installments and theconsensual restructuring of loans for borrowers in difficulties, but with sound businessprospects. Finally, we took both macro and micro prudential measures in order to strengthen thebanks’ balance sheets and preserve their lending capacity.On the fiscal side, the Albanian government delivered fiscal accommodation through:Allocating additional funds to support the health sector;Increasing social transfers to compensate for the households’ loss of income;Offering temporary tax relief to businesses and introducing sovereign credit guaranteeschemes to improve their access to finance.These timely, coordinated and comprehensive set of measures, were ultimately aimed both atcontaining the adverse economic impact and at preserving monetary and financial stability, as aprecondition for the future recovery of the economy.I believe we got the balance right.So far, Albania managed to avoid both a spike in unemployment and major business failures,despite the financial difficulties they faced. Furthermore, our financial system remains solid, withlittle volatility across financial markets, low lending rates, a stable exchange rate, and a liquid andwell capitalized banking sector. Just as importantly, our stress-tests indicate the banking sector’sresilience to additional shocks.Under these premises, I believe the Albanian economy enjoys sufficient preconditions for agradual recovery. However, challenges remain. For the remainder of my speech, I would like tobriefly share with you our perspective on them.***Ladies and Gentlemen,While most baseline economic projection scenarios remain positive, it’s clear the ongoing globalrecovery remains fragile. Policy challenges still present, both in the short and in the mid to longrun.The first challenge is to ensure the sustainability of the ongoing recovery and to safeguard itagainst downside risks, such as potential second lockdown.At the Bank of Albania we believe the overall policy stance should remain accommodative overthe foreseeable future. Any policy normalization should be coordinated and data-dependent. Acoordinated normalization means an ideal sequencing of macroprudential policy stance first,followed by fiscal and monetary policy later. A data-dependent normalization meanspolicymakers need to see tangible evidence of a solid recovery, prior to any policy tightening. 2 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
Given the fragile recovery policymakers would be best advised to lean on the side of caution.Faced with additional shocks, we believe our priority should be to offer additional accommodationto the economy. However, policy makers should be careful in getting the policy mix right so thatpotential long-term costs do not outweigh short term benefits. To that extent, we believe:Fiscal policy should provide additional support, subject to existing fiscal space. So far, publicsector sin the developed economies have little financing constraints, partly on account ofmassive injections of liquidity from central banks. The same appears to be true also for theemerging market economies, such as Albania, which continue to enjoy both market access andrelatively low financing costs. However, the fiscal authorities of emerging market economiesshould be mindful on the need to preserve market credibility on the sustainability of their finances.Financial intermediaries – such as banks – have also shared their fair share of the burden.They would naturally absorb a large part of the additional financial costs incurred in case offurther shocks. However, financial and macroprudential policies should avoid the temptationof shifting an ever increasing part of the cost on the banks’ balance sheets. Financial stabilityand a robust banking sector remain paramount for the long-term growth.Finally, monetary policy should offer additional stimulus. Liquid financial markets are not thecure to the crisis, but they remain a necessary precondition to any solution. Unconventionalinstruments are fast becoming a natural part of the policy toolkit of major central banks.Central banks across emerging markets – including Albania – are also exploring thepossibility of employing unconventional instruments. However, it is not without risks and itmight not be easily implemented in emerging economies. In particular, we believe emergingmarkets’ central banks should avoid raising the risk profile of their balance sheets andshould strive to preserve the credibility of their policy frameworks and independence.The second set of challenges is to acknowledge the long-term impact of the pandemic on oureconomies and societies, and to account for them in our policy frameworks. The spectrum ofpotential implications is wide but I will try to concentrate my remarks on a few items:The pandemic may drive a greater gap in terms of inequality, both among the advanced anddeveloping economies as well as within an economy. An economic consequence of thispandemic is that it may slow down the catch-up process of developing economies relative toadvanced ones. An additional one may be inequality within an economy, given thatunemployment hits more the young population and those less educated. How thesedivergences may shape the future of social and economic policies aiming at addressingthese divergences, this remains to be seen.The enforced limited social interaction due to the risk from coronavirus has accelerated theshift towards digital business and digital finance. While financial technology (or FinTech) hasbeen on the rise prior to this pandemic, the lockdown and limited social interaction haspromoted further growth of this sector which may change the landscape of financial industryin the future.The pandemic may well trigger permanent shifts to the work-life balance. Remote workingcan become a permanent option in the future as some global companies may have alreadypredicted.A final issue, is how the pandemic may affect the current climate crisis in the long run.Besides the short-term impact of the lockdown on the climate issue, an optimistic viewholds that the lockdown may trigger e new momentum towards a cleaner economy.***Honorable participants,I am looking forward to an open discussion and your fruitful feedback on these issues. 3 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
I am confident a frank exchange of ideas will enrich our joint understanding on the nature ofchallenges we are facing as well as on the best policies and instruments we should deploy totackle them.Let me close by thanking you for being with us today! 4 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
     Robert Holzmann Governor Oesterreichische Nationalbank        Welcome remarks   Vienna, November 5, 2020  Publisher: Oesterreichische Nationalbank Communications Division Otto-Wagner-Platz 3, 1090 Vienna CESEE in the COVID-19 crisis – the role of the EU and global spillovers Opening remarks at the Conference on European Economic Integration (CEEI) 2020 Ladies and Gentlemen, Welcome to this year’s Conference on European Economic Integration. Before we get started, I would like to invite you to join me in a moment of silence to remember the victims of this week’s horrific terrorist attack in Vienna. We would like to extend our deepest sympathy to the families and friends of the victims and express our solidarity with everyone shaken by Monday’s events. (Silence) As we face yet another challenge, I have to say that I am proud that – all of us together – have already successfully managed the challenge of making this event happen – despite dire circumstances. So, please allow me to once again welcome you to this year’s Conference on European Economic Integration, the first fully virtual conference in the longstanding tradition of this OeNB conference series. Let me particularly welcome • Professor Marcel Fratzscher, President of the German Institute for Economic Research (DIW Berlin) and Professor Adam Tooze from Columbia University; • as well as my central bank colleagues • Senior Vice President Linda Goldberg from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York; • Governor Anita Angelovska Bezhoska from the Republic of North Macedonia; • Deputy Governor Leonardo Badea from Romania; • Governor Madis Müller from Estonia; • Governor Boris Vujčić from Croatia. 
 Page 2 von 8 2020 marks the year with the deepest recession in the Central, Eastern and Southeastern European (CESEE) region since the transformation recession almost three decades ago. According to the latest IMF outlook, real GDP in the three CESEE subregions, the EU Member States, the Western Balkans and Russia, will decline by around 5% in 2020. The more gradual spread of the pandemic in Eastern Europe in spring 2020 and the swift response by local authorities prevented a major spike in infection numbers similar to that seen in many Southern and Western European countries. This enabled the CESEE region to start lifting restrictions on public life and the economy at a comparatively early stage. As a result, the IMF expects a smaller contraction in the region than in the euro area. In its projections for six CESEE EU Member States, the OeNB expects a downturn similar to that forecast by the IMF for 2020, but a more protracted recovery in 2021 and 2022. This forecast is subject to substantial downside risks stemming from the uncertainty concerning the further spread of coronavirus. Unique features: a health crisis truly global in scope The current crisis has two unique features that distinguish it from all preceding crises of the past decades: it started off as a health crisis, but has immediately morphed into an economic crisis, and it seems to be unprecedented in terms of its global coverage, simultaneity and economic severity. Let me first elaborate on the first distinguishing feature: The stringent containment measures in response to the health crisis set the ground for a major economic downturn. The current surge in infection numbers, especially in many countries of the CESEE region, does not bode well for a change in the crisis response in the near future: We may see more stringent containment measures over the winter, as has already been witnessed in the Czech Republic and Slovakia. Thus, the substantial downside risks are, in part, already materializing. This will aggravate the economic burden. Let me now move on to the second distinguishing feature: The crisis is truly global in nature. Hence, we are confronted with a simultaneous shock to both domestic and external demand. In addition, an unprecedented degree of uncertainty is weighing negatively on consumption and investment. As a result, especially small, open and strongly integrated economies – like the CESEE countries – are highly vulnerable in economic terms. Before relating these two features to the topic of this year’s conference, let me briefly review the most recent economic developments in the CESEE region. Largest recession since the early 1990s In the second quarter of 2020, several CESEE countries reported the largest quarterly decline in economic activity since the early years of transition in the 1990s. Despite the depth of the GDP decline in the second quarter of 2020, the CESEE region still reported more benign real GDP decline figures than the euro area (–7.3% compared to –11.8%, quarter on quarter). The summer months allowed for a breather; however, the swift economic recovery is likely to be short-lived. This is, at least, indicated by the most recent readings of activity as well as sentiment indicators. Against the background of rapidly rising infection numbers, improvements in these indicators have stalled in the past few weeks (Schreiner et al., 2020). Economic policy has come to the rescue The CESEE countries deployed rather large fiscal packages, including i.a. tax cuts, wage subsidies and short-time working schemes. At their maximum usage, such schemes covered, for example, 
 Page 3 von 8 up to 15% of the workforce in Slovenia and Slovakia, up to 20% in Romania and about one-third in Croatia. Of course, the size of fiscal packages varied according to the fiscal space available. Monetary policy reacted as well. In several countries quantitative easing via outright government bond purchases emerged as an important pillar of monetary policy. Moreover, macroprudential measures were adopted that cushioned the impact of the crisis on both banks and borrowers. The CESEE countries also introduced moratoria which played an important role in administering – metaphorically speaking – first aid. Since the moratoria only provided temporary relief, they have since been extended and better targeted. However, it was not only domestic policies that came to the rescue, but also international cooperation and liquidity support which were negotiated in a timely manner by international financial institutions, such as the IMF and the EBRD, as well as with the ECB. Regarding the latter, let me draw your attention to the liquidity arrangements between the ECB and the CESEE countries, including bilateral swap and repo lines and the newly established precautionary backstop facility EUREP. As a case in point, the ECB agreed on new swap lines with Bulgaria and Croatia in spring and early summer, and on new repo lines with Albania, Hungary, North Macedonia, Romania and Serbia. This support helped stabilize international capital flows for these countries. The global nature of the crisis impacts on CESEE via GVCs and policy spillovers After this brief review of the most recent economic developments in the CESEE region, let me come back to the second distinguishing feature of the current crisis – its global nature. This brings me directly to this year’s CEEI which addresses the topic of “CESEE in the COVID-19 crisis – the role of the EU and global spillovers.” In this context, I would like to focus on three issues: i) the role of global value chains (GVCs); ii) the role of monetary policy spillovers; and iii) the role of EU funds. 1. The role of GVCs First, the CESEE countries are among the countries with the highest degree of economic integration through trade, foreign direct investment (FDI) and financial linkages. Together with Germany, many of the CESEE economies form the backbone of European manufacturing with a strong focus on the following industries: transport equipment, electronic equipment, metallurgy, machinery and chemicals. This central role within globally important value chains has often been considered as a stabilizing factor for two reasons: i) FDI is an important determinant of production integration, and ii) trade relations in GVCs are rather stable. As it is difficult to find the right producer for highly specialized and tailor-made solutions that have to be delivered just in time in specific value chains, trade relationships in GVCs imply large sunk costs when they are established. This also means that in case of external shocks, the volume of trade will adjust in a flexible manner but the trade relationships within the value chains will be maintained. This dominance of adjustment on the intensive margin of trade rather than on the extensive margin supports stability. Furthermore, GVC integration often implies external funding through FDI; in other words, GVCs rely on a rather stable form of external funding. Yet, in the current global crisis, supply disruptions occurred at the beginning of the crisis. Meanwhile, major problems result from weak global demand for final goods, which poses challenges for the deeply integrated CESEE economies. 
 Page 4 von 8 2. The role of monetary policy spillovers Second, the ECB’s monetary policy response to the pandemic has renewed our interest in monetary policy spillovers and whether they are beneficial to the spillover-receiving countries. While US monetary policy is the main driver of a global financial cycle, CESEE countries seem to be strongly affected by monetary spillovers from the euro area, as the CESEE region is strongly integrated with the euro area through both trade and financial flows, particularly cross-border bank flows. We will discuss this issue extensively in session 1 and panel 1 today, so let me just briefly mention that empirical evidence points to strong spillovers. OeNB research shows that monetary easing in the euro area has positive effects on output, but also on consumer and equity prices in the CESEE region (Feldkircher and Schuberth, 2020). This is in line with most empirical studies on this topic (Colabella, 2020; Horváth and Voslářová, 2017; Potjagailo, 2017). In some cases, they even report an amplification of the effects through second-round effects (Feldkircher, 2015; Feldkircher and Schuberth, 2020) by positively influencing the output of trading partners as well. Some authors also find that output spillovers are relatively stronger than price spillovers when compared to the relative strength of output versus price effects in the euro area itself (Benecká et al., 2018; Moder, 2019). These effects are transmitted through different channels: via demand, exchange rates and financial linkages (Feldkircher et al., 2020). A thorough understanding of such spillover effects is thus crucial for the design of appropriate domestic monetary, and also macroprudential, policies which should ideally allow economies to reap the benefits of strong economic and financial integration with the euro area, while mitigating the associated risks. I am looking forward to discussing these issues with my esteemed colleagues later on in panel 1. 3. The role of EU funds Third, let me turn to the role of EU funds. As an immediate response, EU authorities provided emergency support financing and eased certain requirements, such as national co-financing requirements, to tap available cohesion and structural funds from this year’s EU budget. In parallel, flexibility clauses in the fiscal framework were activated and state aid rules temporarily adjusted. As a next step, the European Parliament and the Council agreed on the EUR 100 billion SURE instrument proposed by the European Commission. SURE stands for “support to mitigate unemployment risks in an emergency.” Based on EU budget capital market borrowing, the SURE instrument will provide loans to individual Member States to support short-time work schemes and help Member States protect jobs and thus employees and self-employed against the risk of unemployment. The first bond issuance for this program was substantially oversubscribed and can be considered a success. The Council has already approved financial support under SURE to several Member States. Romania, for example, will receive EUR 4 billion, and Poland will receive EUR 11 billion. Pursuant to the invitation by the European Council and with a view to supporting a common broad-based recovery within the EU, the European Commission complemented its previous budgetary proposals for the next multiannual financial framework (MFF) for the period from 2021 to 2027 with a “recovery package” at the end of May. According to the Council, the funds under this European Union recovery instrument referred to as “Next Generation EU” (NGEU) are 
 Page 5 von 8 designed to be committed over the period from 2021 to 2023 and to be paid out until end-2026. The negotiations between the European Parliament and the Council Presidency on the European Union recovery instrument have been ongoing since the end of August, in parallel to the negotiations on the proposals for the MFF which were already tabled back in 2018. As usual, nothing is agreed until everything is agreed – but I am convinced that both sides of the negotiation table are well aware of their great responsibility in the current situation. At barely 1% of EU gross national income (GNI), the EU budget is tiny. Therefore, national sovereign borrowing will continue to bear the brunt of the fiscal deficit financing in all EU Member States. Still, the simultaneous investment stimulus provided by the EU recovery funds in the coming years is expected to be substantial and highly welcome. Even more so, as EU countries of below-average per capita income, i.e. the CESEE EU Member States in particular, will be among the largest beneficiaries. Let me now zoom in on the Recovery and Resilience Facility (RFF), the largest program under the European Union recovery instrument. The RFF particularly aims at fostering cohesion and upward convergence by improving resilience and growth potential as well as by supporting the green and digital transitions. In order to receive support from the RFF, EU Member States have to submit national recovery and resilience plans. Each plan will have to dedicate a minimum of 37% of expenditure to climate-related (green) investment and a minimum of 20% of expenditure to digital investment (on both infrastructure and capacities). While these targets are clearly set, there may be somewhat more conditionality needed to reach the goals stated earlier, especially with respect to supporting the green transition. I will come back to this in my conclusions. Did the crisis change our way of thinking? It is too early to judge whether the COVID-19 crisis will have a lasting impact on economic policymaking. Yet, the crisis has certainly put a spotlight on the powerful effects that economic policy can have. The direct macroeconomic support observed during the past six months has been impressive. Let me elaborate on one issue in this context, which will be addressed tomorrow in more detail: the view on globalization and the attitude toward global value chains. The COVID-19 crisis led to a marked increase in the demand for specific goods, e.g. health products and IT equipment. These goods are produced in highly organized global value chains. Yet, at the same time, the crisis also led to interruptions in these supply chains due to restrictions in transport and labor mobility. This situation has been exacerbated by export bans and quantity restrictions. World Trade Organization (WTO) estimates suggest that around 20% of global exports of protective clothing and 17% of disinfectant exports were affected. In light of these examples, does the crisis call for a different view on global value chains? The COVID-19 crisis may not be a “game changer” in this respect, but it will reinforce a trend that has been observed for quite some time. The expansion of global value chains has been slowing since the mid-2000s, and this trend has been intensified by the global financial crisis. So far, however, we cannot speak of a shortening or even dismantling of global value chains. After all, the rather swift revival of global value chains following the easing of restrictions has demonstrated their stability and their potential for supporting the recovery. Certainly, the current 
 Page 6 von 8 crisis holds some lessons: to promote not only efficient, but also robust and resilient global value chains in the future. For example, the build-up of safety stocks for essential goods could provide for sufficient buffers even though it requires a careful balancing of benefits and costs. Upstream bottlenecks should be identified and avoided by broadening the supplier base. Governments can support the smooth functioning of global value chains by facilitating the smooth flow of goods and services and by supporting substitutability of inputs through harmonizing norms and standards. In lieu of conclusions: most imminent reform priorities Let me end by drawing your attention to the most pressing priorities. In the near term – and depending on the further spread of the pandemic – the main challenge will be to use the policy space in an efficient way to mitigate the economic impact of the health crisis against the need of implementing indispensable health policy containment measures. This can be done by making use of monetary, fiscal and macroprudential policies that put quality over quantity. At the same time, the sizeable structural challenges faced by our economies should be tackled as well. In this context, I would like to mention two reform priorities: the digital transformation and the green transformation. With respect to the digital transformation, the current crisis has possibly acted as a catalyst. This is, inter alia, evidenced by the simple fact that we are meeting virtually for the first time in the CEEI’s history. In the context of global value chains, a focus should be put on digitalization. Policy can support the information and communication technology (ICT) intensity of global value chains and thus make them more resilient to future shocks. Regulatory frameworks for innovation, digitalization and cross-border capital flows are key to enable a sound business environment and support not only economic recovery but also productivity growth in the long run. The strategic and forward-looking positioning of EU firms in regional and global production networks can be supported by policies linked to capital market development and by a digital single market. Another eminent issue is the green transformation. The move toward a green economy implies a wide range of decisions that have to be taken. For example, the question of carbon emission pricing and respective taxation – both domestically and in the form of a border adjustment mechanism – must be addressed. Measures to avoid or deal with stranded assets must be considered. Moreover, in addition to promoting green technologies, we will certainly need regulation to limit or eliminate brown technologies. The latter are still prevalent in the transportation sector, where we need to reduce individual motorized travel to a large extent. In this regard, let me end my remarks by briefly commenting on the European railway system: With 26% of the global network of railways, Europe exhibits the second largest railway infrastructure based on operating length after the Americas (accounting for 37%). As an aside, the predecessor of the current dominant carrier in Austria, the OeBB, was the K.K. Staatsbahnen of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. The K.K. Staatsbahnen were the result of an emergency nationalization in 1884 following an economic crisis ten years earlier. Many private carriers of the then new technology were in economic difficulties and the takeover by the state implied a shift in the policy paradigm. Already 150 years ago, a crisis acted as a catalyst. Yet, the European railway network is far from being seamless. Given the huge technical and structural heterogeneity that prevails in the European railway network, we need strong and 
 Page 7 von 8 coordinated policy support to leap from a 19th century heritage to a Single European Railway Area that is fit for the 21st century. Such efforts should focus on significant investment in intelligent railway infrastructure to overcome the differences in gauges, signaling and voltage systems and to ensure interoperability and connectivity throughout Europe. Moreover, we need investment in the safety and reliability of railway systems to allow for autonomous monitoring and smart maintenance without causing disruptions. A truly integrated European railway system that would allow for a cargo container to be sent from the South of Italy to the North of Sweden, or from Finland to Portugal, within 24 hours, not within a week. It would also allow for most of the cargo trucks to operate within a 50 km radius of home, not within a 500 km or 1,000 km radius. Thus, we need more investment to optimize the modal split in transportation. In this context, let me mention that the EU budget with its Connecting Europe Facility provides a welcome contribution to tackle this common challenge for Europe. I have chosen the European railway system as one example, but I am sure that many more examples can be found for demonstrating innovative ways to come out of this crisis. Another important challenge will be the handling of the unavoidable increase in public debt and its implications for (the conduct of) monetary policy. The ECB’s monetary policy has been hugely supportive, and its effects extend beyond the euro area. I am looking forward to discussing all of these issues with you today and tomorrow! To kick-start our discussions, we are pleased to have a highly renowned keynote speaker join us today. I have the pleasure to welcome and introduce to you Marcel Fratzscher. Marcel Fratzscher is an economist, author and columnist. He is President of the German Institute for Economic Research (DIW Berlin) – one of Europe’s leading independent economic research institutes and think tanks – and Professor of Macroeconomics at the Humboldt University of Berlin. He is also member of the High-level Advisory Board of the United Nations on the sustainable development goals (SDGs) and engages for the equality of opportunity for disadvantaged children in various NGOs. His research work focuses on macroeconomics, inequality and European integration. He has published three books since 2014, has a bi-weekly column in Zeit Online and regularly writes for the German and international media, including the Financial Times, Wall Street Journal and Project Syndicate. As I am looking forward very much to his keynote lecture, let me close here, without any further ado, by wishing you an interesting, productive and also entertaining conference. Marcel, the floor is yours.   
 Page 8 von 8 References Benecká, S., L. Fadejeva and M. Feldkircher. 2018. Spillovers from Euro Area Monetary Policy: A Focus on Emerging Europe. Working Papers 4/2018. Latvijas Banka. Colabella, A. 2020. Do ECB’s monetary policies benefit EMEs? A GVAR analysis on the crisis and post-crisis period. Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics: forthcoming. Feldkircher, M. 2015. A global macro model for emerging Europe. In: Journal of Comparative Economics 43(3). 706–726. Feldkircher, M., T. Gruber and F. Huber. 2020. International effects of a compression of euro area yield curves. In: Journal of Banking and Finance: forthcoming. Feldkircher, M. and H. Schuberth. 2020. The transmission of euro area monetary policy shocks to Eastern Europe: New evidence from high frequency identification. OeNB: mimeo. Horváth R and K. Voslářová. 2017. International spillovers of ECB’s unconventional monetary policy: the effect on Central Europe. In: Applied Economics 49(24). 2352– 2364. IMF. 2020. A Long and Difficult Ascent. World Economic Outlook. October 2020. Moder, I. 2019. Spillovers from the ECB’s non-standard monetary policy measures on Southeastern Europe. In: International Journal of Central Banking 15(4). 127–163. Potjagailo, G. 2017. Spillover effects from euro area monetary policy across Europe: A factor-augmented VAR approach. In: Journal of International Money and Finance 72. 127– 147. Schreiner, J. et al. 2020. Developments in selected CESEE countries: Coronavirus sends CESEE region into a deep recession. In: Focus on European Economic Integration Q4/20: forthcoming. 
Elvira Nabiullina: Speech - OPORA RUS Governor SIA sessionSpeech by Ms Elvira Nabiullina, Governor of the Bank of Russia, at the OPORA RUS GovernorSIA session, 3 December 2020.*   *   *Good afternoon, I am happy to welcome you, whether you are now in the Kaliningrad Regionor are video conferencing — this format is becoming quite common now. I hope that this meetingis attended by a large number of participants. Indeed, I was listening very attentively and I thinkthat the approach the Kaliningrad Region is pursuing to develop small and medium-sizedbusinesses is promising and comprehensive. However, we are all very well aware thata lot of projects depend on how accessible funding is — it would be impossible to implementa project when there is no access to funding.Today’s meeting is very important to me: although the Bank of Russia influences the economythrough the financial sector, the ultimate goal of our work is to ensure that the financial sectorhelps the economy and people overcome hardships and develop. Of course, we have alwaysbeen concerned about the issues related to the financing of small enterprises. We carryout regular meetings with OPORA RUSSIA President Alexander Kalinin several times a yearto discuss the most topical problems and advance in both the regulation and other areasassociated with the development of multiple projects. We do understand that it is rather difficultfor small businesses to receive financing even in normal conditions, and in challenging timessmall and medium-sized enterprises are those who are affected the most. It is hard for smallbusinesses to achieve favourable terms and protect their interests in the course of negotiationswith banks. In addition, small, just as medium-sized enterprises are certainly on a budgetand they need to have access to both loans and daily financial transactions.Normally, we closely monitor SME lending trends. This year, we also put a special focus on loanrestructuring since it became highly requested when many companies really lost their revenuesand customers. Not all companies had safety cushions; and even large corporates do not alwayshave them. Moreover, it is rather hard for small and medium-sized businesses to maintain safetycushions for challenging times.I should stress that this period still differs from the 2014–2015 crisis, for instance. SME lendingplummeted in 2014–2015, while this year the trend is generally positive. Of course,it may not fully offset all the hardships small and medium-sized enterprises have to face.Nonetheless, the loan portfolio has expanded by nearly 15%, specifically 14.7%, sincethe beginning of the year. The number of borrowers has increased by 63.6% since early 2020,to exceed 450,000 companies. We know that small and medium-sized businesses developpredominantly owing to their profits, their equity, which is not bad, and that nowadays a largenumber of enterprises have had an opportunity to apply to banks and receive these loans duringthis period.Indeed, companies applied for loans because they were forced to do that and it was primarilyassociated with their need to make up for decreased revenues in the second quarter.The preferential lending programmes launched by the Government were essential in this regard,including both the 0% wage loan and 2% programmes. Banks have granted over 0.5 trillionrubles since the beginning of the year within these programmes. I would like to remind you that,in order to support these programmes, to maintain lending, the Bank of Russia also launchedits preferential refinancing instrument for banks, in addition to the one that existed earlier, withthe limit of 500 billion rubles exactly to support the portfolio of projects. We are well aware that,although the lending programmes with state guarantees, sureties, as well as corporate suretieshave expanded, preferential programmes are not accessible to all enterprises, but only to a smallportion of them. The objective of our programme was to incentivise banks to maintain their 1 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
lending amounts. In other words, those banks that did not reduce their SME lending considerably,including both under preferential and standard programmes, received funds from the CentralBank at a rather attractive interest rate, recently equalling 2.25%. This was a resource that trulyhelped maintain lending volumes.A survey by OPORA RUSSIA — we are closely monitoring your survey findings — shows thatbusinesses generally record a higher accessibility of loans in recent months. We appreciate thisview.Nonetheless, we can see that currently loans are mostly concentrated with large banks,but we are confident that both banks with a basic licence and regional banks will be capableto significantly contribute to the small business development and become more flexible sincethey better understand clients’ interests and regional specifics. We are going to advance thissegment of the banking system. Not only large banks have had access to our special-purposeinstrument: 55 banks have used it, including regional banks and those banks that receivedcorporate sureties.As regards loan restructuring, as you know, an important aspect is that we have been improvingthe financial system through resolution measures for many years, in order to make it resilientand capable to support its clients in challenging periods. We can see that the banking sectorhas really demonstrated its readiness to provide support to a considerable portionof its borrowers during this hard period. More than 80% of the restructured loans were underbanks’ in-house programmes, and not because this was required by law.Since the beginning of the year, the amount of restructured SME loans has reached 819 billionrubles, which is over 15% of the SME portfolio.Initially, we planned that this restructuring option and incentives for banks to restructure loanswould remain effective until 30 September, but then we decided to extend these measures untilthe end of the year. The number of loan restructuring applications is currently going down,but restructuring is still requested. Many companies have not had enough time to recover.Furthermore, they could also be affected by restrictions implemented in a range of regions.Therefore, just a few days ago we decided to extend this option for SME loan restructuring untilthe end of 2021 Q1, and this applies to both new and repeated restructurings. We are certainlygoing to monitor further how the situation changes. Moreover, I would like to remind you thatwe extended the regulatory relaxations for banks related to provisioning for restructured loansuntil 1 July. This privilege is also available to large corporates until 1 April. This concession periodwill also cover loans that will be restructured in 2021 Q1. In addition, we recommend that lendersand credit history bureaus do not take into account these restructurings as a negative factorin borrowers’ credit histories. I know that many small and medium-sized enterprises focusedon this issue and this is a sensitive topic for them.I would like to thank OPORA RUSSIA for becoming the mediator in the process of loanrestructuring. At the first stage, when businesses were especially stressed due to restrictionsand uncertainty and because not all support programmes had gained momentum by thenand banks had not yet adjusted their business processes since the number of restructuringapplications was really enormous and nobody could have expected that, the Bank of Russiatogether with OPORA RUSSIA and other business associations created a ‘green line’mechanism for businesses to apply to regarding any problems in their relations with banks.As a result, these were business associations who communicated with banks directly,and if they failed to solve a problem, the Bank of Russia intervened. This mechanism has provento be efficient and highly requested. Therefore, we have decided to make it a permanent one.We are well aware that small companies may really face difficulties trying to gain banks’consideration and loyalty towards them. Therefore, it is very good that they have their lobbyists,in the good sense of the word. 2 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
As I have already said at the beginning, it is critical for us to make the communication betweenthe financial sector in general and small businesses as easy as possible. This is not only relatedto the accessibility of loans.Today, I would like to dwell on three issues. Of course, there are also other aspects, but sincetime is limited I will focus on three issues.Firstly, this is certainly anti-money laundering and counter-terrorism financing (AML/CTF). Thisis a very acute topic for businesses, and we have already discussed it many times. The secondissue is how the Faster Payments System evolves and what benefits it can provide to SMEs.The third topic I may not ignore and which is currently widely discussed is a digital ruble and whatit can give to businesses.As regards AML/CTF problems, we hold, and I hope that you also comprehend it, that these anti-money laundering procedures are absolutely crucial since they protect the banking systemand the economy in general against ‘dirty’ business and crime. However, these procedures havetheir drawbacks. Banks may behave suspiciously even towards lawful companies, and we haveobserved this. Banks are not ready to investigate the situation when these are small clients thatdo not bring high profits, such as small and medium-sized enterprises. It is easier for banks justto block transactions than to consider them carefully. As a result, this affects bona fidebusinesses. We have been employing the mechanism for rehabilitating such affected companiesfor a while already, but we are aware that the entire system requires redesigning and costs needto be lower. Of course, it is now possible for a firm to be rehabilitated, but it would be betterto avoid such a situation where companies have to undergo all these procedures, includingan examination by the commission, since this is stressful for any market participants.Therefore, we discussed this topic already last year, but we have now progressed to the activephase of the efforts aimed at establishing the centralised information service Know YourCustomer, or KYC, as we have got used to saying. This platform will make it possible to reducethe number of banks’ refusals and companies’ expenses for the communication with banks.Clients’ risks will be assessed not by banks, but by the platform developed by the Bank of Russiathat will classify companies into three risk groups according to the traffic light principle. Banks willbe able to focus only on the group having these risk signs and on the analysis of the operationsof clients involving potentially higher risks.We are going to launch this platform into regular operation at the end of 2021 and then scaleit up so as to embrace all credit institutions by the end of 2022 Q1. Of course, we believe thatit will make life easier for SMEs. We have also discussed how to improve this platform togetherwith you.The second issue is the Faster Payments System (FPS).Initially, we launched it to enable P2P transfers. We can see that it is highly requested. However,right from the beginning, we have built this system considering the needs of retailers and smallbusinesses and comprehending that this system may help SMEs cut costs significantly.The FPS addresses the issue of high acquiring fees and considerably reduces costs for tradeand service companies. In contrast to direct caps on fee amounts, it does not disturb the balancein the market. The FPS fees are 2–3 times lower than acquiring fees and may not exceed 0.7%.Another advantage of the FPS is that it helps reduce the cash gap since funds transferredvia the FPS are credited into companies’ accounts instantaneously. This speeds up the turnoverof enterprises’ funds, which is also essential for business.The third aspect is that the FPS is easily deployed. This system requires no additionalequipment, and all necessary software may be promptly installed on the already existing 3 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
terminals and cash desks. Installation and debugging take two or three dayson average. At the beginning of next year, we will also launch the mobile application of the FPS.It will enable any retailers to integrate with the system faster, without the need to create theirown apps. Moreover, other applications will function as well.We are going to carry out regular training workshops on the FPS, with the first one scheduledfor 15 December. So, you are welcome to join it. In future, we will hold such events together withOPORA RUSSIA and other business associations.And the last topic I would like to touch upon is a digital ruble.In October, we released our consultation paper on a digital ruble. You are welcome to readit if you are interested in. As you know, many foreign central banks are currently conductinganalytical studies as well. A number of banks, for instance in China, have already started testingdigital currencies. We may talk of a global technological revolution in central banks which willcreate a new form of money.What are the differences between a digital ruble and the currently existing cash and non-cashmoney forms?Firstly, a digital ruble is an obligation of the Central Bank, and not of commercial banks, whichmakes it similar to cash rubles. For those holding digital rubles, this implies that they willpreserve this money, whatever happens to their banks.Secondly, a digital ruble enables faster and more reliable payments and settlements.We are currently exploring several models to design a digital ruble which organise the interactionbetween customers, the Central Bank and commercial banks differently, but all the models havethese advantages. These are faster, reliable and secure payments.To a certain extent, a digital ruble also blurs the distinction between cash and non-cashpayments. We are studying the option of launching offline payments with digital rublesvia special-purpose wallets, but this is a challenging issue. This will enable people to pay withdigital rubles even where there is no internet connection and they do not have cash.For companies operating in such localities, in remote areas, this option will reduce cash turnovercosts.Of course, a digital ruble may also create new risks, and we are closely exploring them. Thesemay include cyber risks and the impact of this new form of money on the financial sector,primarily banks, and on the monetary policy.We are now taking efforts to carry out a comprehensive discussion of these benefits and riskswith the business community, the financial sector, and lawmakers. You are also welcome to jointhis discussion. We have plenty of formats to take part in it.At the moment, we can see that these are banks who are concerned the most about a digitalruble — they perceive it as a factor that may decrease their profits. Just as the FPS, for instance,that levels out even the possibilities for banks and trade and service companies to negotiatecooperation terms to process payments and strengthens the competition in the market, a digitalruble decreases costs for businesses, but, on the other hand, may seize a part of banks’fee income from transactions. We believe this to be a natural trend in the developmentof the financial system: financial intermediaries should become increasingly cheaperfor the economy and should earn their revenues owing to new products and services convenientto and requested by customers, and not because clients have no other options, as was the casewith acquiring fees. Therefore, a stronger competition in this area will benefit the economyand businesses. In our opinion, SMEs will definitely benefit from this. 4 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
In addition to the topics I focused on today, we certainly continue to develop bank loanalternatives to enable businesses to fully employ the potential of the financial sector. In particular,we continue to develop fund raising through the ‘green sector’ of the exchange and othersecurities market instruments, online factoring, and crowdfunding, which is a critical issue.We are updating our roadmap for the development of financing for small and medium-sizedbusinesses, with the active engagement of OPORA RUSSIA, and are going to finalise the projectsoon. We have a special roadmap for small companies. I have said once again that thisis a priority for us, and we have a targeted range of measures we are discussing with you.Wrapping up, I would like to wish success to businesses. We will do our best to enhancethe financial system so that it meets companies’ needs as much as possible and will continueour extensive cooperation with OPORA RUSSIA in order to receive feedback and find new pointsof growth. I wish you all resilience in your business, so that you are capable to overcomeany challenges and successfully develop. Thank you very much for your attention. 5 / 5BIS central bankers' speeches
  Testimony by the Governor of the Banco de España before the Audit Committee on Democratic Quality, the Fight against Corruption, and Institutional and Legal Reforms Congress of Deputies Pablo Hernández de Cos Governor       22.12.2020  
     1   Ladies and gentlemen, I appreciate your request that I should appear before this Audit Committee on Democratic Quality, the Fight against Corruption, and Institutional and Legal Reforms to address the question of the impartiality and autonomy of independent economic authorities.  Allow me to take as a starting point for my address the importance the economic literature has attributed in recent decades to the quality of institutions, as a linchpin of economic development and growth.  As part of this broad notion of the quality of institutions, independent agencies – over which governments have no controlling or management powers – are particularly important for achieving certain goals. Indeed, in some areas of the economy independent institutions have a long-standing tradition in market economies and are a basic pillar of their institutional structure.  The rationale behind such institutions lies in considerations of general interest, with the conviction that independence allows a greater benefit to be had for society than that which would be attained were powers assumed directly by political authorities.  Independent agencies acquire this status by decision of the maximum political authorities of the State (parliaments), and are given a remit in specific decision-making areas (for instance, monetary policy for central banks) and a legal framework to decide and act independently in the matters under their purview.  The public interest objective underlying the status of independence leads me to view it as a value that should be preserved and strengthened, for the benefit of properly fulfilling the mission with which the agency has been entrusted and, thereby, of greater social well-being. In any event, independence should be accompanied by guarantees as to the professional competence and personal integrity of the members of the independent body, especially its senior officials, and as to the controls to which it is subject and its accountability. To attain these guarantees, controls and accountability, action must be taken on selection, appointment and dismissal procedures for individuals in management and governance positions in the independent body, on the transparency of conduct and results, and on the governance of the institution.  I shall commence by reviewing the arguments that justify the independence of economic authorities and supervisors. I shall then address the elements that give shape to an institution’s formal independence, and their specific configuration in the case of the Banco de España. Thirdly, I shall offer my thoughts on the status of independence as a necessary, but insufficient, condition for independent agencies. I shall then highlight potential ways to strengthen the independence of the Banco de España, moving on thereafter to identifying potential improvements to the financial supervision model in Spain. Lastly, I shall refer to our institution’s control mechanisms and transparency standards, and certain governance aspects.  
     2   1 The value of independence in economic authorities and supervisors  In the area of the economy, monetary policy and financial supervision are two of the spheres habitually occupied by independent institutions in the developed countries.1 In our case, for the euro area, the European Central Bank (ECB) – of whose system the Banco de España is a part – is the independent monetary authority whose primary objective is to maintain price stability (see Annex 1). Moreover, the Banco de España has, among other functions, regulatory and supervisory responsibilities for the banking sector (the ECB has also assumed these responsibilities in respect of significant institutions). It is also responsible for the stability of the financial system as a whole, the preventive resolution of financial institutions (in the framework of the European Single Resolution Mechanism), the protection of bank customers, the supervision of payment services providers and the correct operation of payment systems and market infrastructures. Further, it advises the Government, produces reports and studies and compiles and publishes statistics relating to its functions.  The National Securities Market Commission (CNMV) is the independent agency entrusted with the oversight and inspection of Spanish securities markets and the activity of all securities market players. Other areas of the economy are also habitually covered by independent agencies. Cases in point, to name a few, are the defence of competition and the regulation of specific industries, such as energy and telecommunications (under the responsibility of the National Markets and Competition Commission – CNMC – in Spain), the auditing of public sector accounts and economic management (carried out by the Spanish Court of Auditors) and, a more recent development, effective compliance by the general government sector with the principle of budgetary stability (the preserve of the Independent Authority for Fiscal Responsibility, AIRef).  As I stated, the ultimate aim of assigning these functions to independent agencies is to obtain an institutional design that ensures a greater level of collective well-being. In this respect, allow me to begin by recalling the main reason why the control of inflation was assigned to independent monetary authorities in a large number of economies. The argument is what the economic literature calls “time inconsistency”, which highlights the role of expectations in agents’ behaviour. I believe price stability unquestionably enhances economic growth and improves well-being in the long run. However, if the monetary authority is not independent and, having regard to other more short-term goals, uses monetary policy to stimulate demand repeatedly and above what would be consistent with its inflation objective, an inflationary bias is generated. In the short run higher levels of economic activity and employment can be attained, but the costs emerge later. The inflationary bias is ultimately anticipated and incorporated into agents’ expectations and, therefore, into price-setting and wage bargaining. The outcome is higher inflation without lasting improvements in the economy’s level of output and employment. This detracts from monetary policy efficiency and the commitments to price stability cease to be credible.  Taking the long view that price stability requires is more difficult for political authorities, which may be naturally inclined to give priority to shorter-term considerations. Moreover, and more generally, changes in government usually entail changes to political goals and, frequently, the replacement of previous commitments with new ones. That is difficult to square with the objective of credibility that private agents demand when they take their                                                                                               1 A detailed discussion of independent economic agencies in Spain can be found in J. Segura (coord.) (2018), Reguladores y supervisores económicos independientes: el caso español, Fundación Ramón Areces.  
     3   decisions with medium and long-term results. Also, the eminently technical nature of the functions of central banks likewise warrants this status.  All these arguments could be extended to economic regulatory and supervisory agencies other than the monetary authority. Indeed, independence is one of the principles envisaged in “Best Practice Principles on the Governance of Regulators”, a document released by the Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development (OECD), to avoid undue influence and maintain confidence. The operational independence of banking supervisors vis-à-vis governments and the interests of the sector being supervised is also part of the “Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision” set out by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision.2 In this respect, the empirical evidence shows that independent authorities and supervisors provide greater legal security and effectiveness in the fulfilment of their mandates than other, alternative institutional arrangements.  True, independence is for a specific reason in those agencies entrusted with advising, monitoring or evaluating public policies, whether of a budgetary or other nature. Institutional independence is the best means of ensuring that evaluations are made in accordance with objective and technical criteria, removed from the political opinions and interests of those who are being evaluated. I also wish to emphasise the value of independence when it comes to the compilation and publication of statistics and analytical studies by economic supervisors as part of their mandate. For these functions, experts need to adhere to technical judgement, free from interference and conflicts of interest, as their work is essential for the monitoring by national authorities, international organisations and the public at large of the general economic situation and specific sectors. Independence in the field of statistical and economic analysis means that institutions must work in a demanding environment where data quality, statistical reliability and analytical rigour are essential. And all the more so when the messages conveyed or recommendations made entail short-term costs in exchange for long-term beneficial objectives.   2 The configuration of an independent agency: the case of the Banco de España If the independence of an agency that assumes functions in the general interest is to be effective, such independence must be formally acknowledged in the regulatory sphere. It is worth distinguishing here between institutional, legal, functional and financial independence and the personal independence of an agency’s senior officials.  The regulatory reference to the Banco de España as an independent agency is set in the 1994 Law of Autonomy, in the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (EU), in the Statutes of the European System of Central Banks and in the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) Regulation. This independence is no mere legal expression since, as I shall now stress, it is accompanied by several elements that enable it to be effectively exercised.                                                                                               2 Also, in the realm of the European single market, the necessary consistency of the various coexisting supervisory frameworks advises that banking supervision be exercised by an independent institution. This was reflected in the assumption by the ECB of the supervisory responsibilities for European significant financial institutions as from 2014. 
     4   First, the Banco de España has institutional independence in that the regulations ensure the capacity of its governing bodies to act autonomously, without hierarchical subordination to any higher authority. Indeed, as provided for under its Law of Autonomy, in exercising the functions derived from its membership of the European System of Central Banks, the Government may not give instructions to the Banco de España, and the latter may not seek or take them.3 These principles are also applicable to the functions exercised as a banking supervisor within the SSM. Given the dual role of the Banco de España as a national central bank of the Eurosystem and a supervisory authority of the SSM, its independence takes on an extra dimension regarding the necessary guarantee as to the performance of both functions autonomously (which does not mean separately) within a single institution.  In this respect, it should be stressed that the governance of the Banco de España is underpinned by an orderly distribution of different powers among the bodies that the Law of Autonomy specifies as the governing bodies of our institution: Governor, Deputy Governor, Governing Council and Executive Commission. Thus, the functions assigned to the Banco de España by law are performed in a balanced way by these bodies, in accordance with the powers set out in Annex 2. These arrangements are based on the presence in these collegiate bodies of a significant percentage of independent Council members (by way of example, six out of ten of the Council members with voting rights on the Governing Council) appointed on the basis of their competence, knowledge and experience in the field of economics, the financial system or law. Legal independence is represented in the institution’s own legal personality, which is different from that any other State or General Government agency may have. As a result of this personality, the Banco de España has the autonomy to assume contractual rights and obligations with third parties and to take decisions under its remit, which are legally binding for those concerned. Functional independence means that, under the principles of observance of the law and the general interest that govern its conduct, the Banco de España has the instruments needed to perform its function and the autonomy to decide on the internal resources and processes it deploys to fulfil the objectives assigned to it. This autonomy extends to its internal organisation (divisions, departments and posts, with their tasks and procedures). As an exception, a matter to which I shall return, there is currently the possibility of government review of some of its decisions in the supervisory sphere. Personal independence means that senior management, the Council members and employees of the Banco de España can do their work “independently” in the exercise of the functions entrusted to the institution. Here, independence means that in the decisions taken and in the attendant actions, members of the institution must be free from external interference and be guided exclusively by rigour and professional competence.                                                                                                3 Article 7(4) of the Law of Autonomy of the Banco de España, in keeping with Article 130 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the EU, which states: “When exercising the powers and carrying out the tasks and duties conferred upon them by the Treaties and the Statute of the ESCB and of the ECB, neither the European Central Bank, nor a national central bank, nor any member of their decision-making bodies shall seek or take instructions from Union institutions, bodies, offices or agencies, from any government of a Member State or from any other body. The Union institutions, bodies, offices or agencies and the governments of the Member States undertake to respect this principle and not to seek to influence the members of the decision-making bodies of the European Central Bank or of the national central banks in the performance of their tasks." 
     5   In practice, the personal independence of the institution’s senior officials is sought through the arrangements in respect of appointment, exercise of mandate and stand-down from the post set in place, as a general rule, beforehand.  The independence of the Banco de España’s senior management in relation to the political authorities and to influence from the sector supervised is reinforced, inter alia, by: i) a specific selection procedure for the posts of Governor, Deputy Governor and Council members, with the Governor’s appointment being made at the proposal of the Prime Minister, from among persons with recognised competence in monetary or banking matters and a prior appearance by the Minister for the Economy being required before the competent Parliamentary Committee to report on the candidate;4 ii) the terms of office of the Governor and the Deputy Governor are for six years (exceeding the electoral cycle) and are non-renewable; iii) the setting of specified causes for dismissal from the posts of Governor, Deputy Governor and elected Council members;5 iv) the incompatibilities rules to which the Governor, the Deputy Governor and the Council members are subject; v) the specific conflict of interest rules applicable during their terms of office that include restrictions on financial transactions and private investments; and vi) prohibition of pursuit of professional activity relating to credit institutions or to securities markets in the two years following stand-down from the post (see Annex 3).  As regards the staffing of the institution, the Banco de España, by legal imperative, recruits its employees observing the principles of equality, merit, ability and openness. These principles prevail throughout their career within the institution. Job security for Banco de España employees rests on the protection afforded by labour market legislation, strengthened by various in-house policies (e.g. regarding leave of absence or the establishment or extension of periods of leave). Lastly, financial independence means that an independent institution has sufficient financial resources to equip itself with material and human resources for the pursuit of its mission. In this respect, the Banco de España has sufficient financial capacity as a result of the revenue sources legally and statutorily assigned to it, and it is able to draw on such revenue to cover its functioning costs. The difference between each year’s revenue and costs is made over to the Public Treasury, bolstering State revenues. Accordingly, the Banco de España uses the resources available to it observing the principles of efficiency and effectiveness that should govern the use of all public funds.  I believe the Banco de España’s legal framework and experience as a financially and organisationally independent institution can be a good benchmark for any future re-design of other economic supervisors in Spain which, in some cases, enjoy less autonomy.                                                                                               4 Article 24 of the Law of Autonomy provides that the Governor of the Banco de España shall be appointed by the King following a proposal by the Prime Minister. Nominees must be Spanish and must have recognised competence in monetary or banking matters. Prior to the appointment of the Governor, the Minister for Economy and Finance shall appear before the relevant parliamentary committee under the terms envisaged in Article 203 of the Spanish Parliamentary Internal Regulations, to report on the proposed candidate. The Deputy Governor shall be appointed by the Government following a proposal by the Governor and must meet the same conditions as the Governor. The six elected Council members shall be appointed by the Government following a proposal by the Minister for Economy and Finance, after consultation with the Governor. They must be Spanish and have recognised competence in economy or law. Finally, the two elected members of the Executive Commission shall be appointed by the Governing Council of the Banco de España, following a proposal by the Governor, from among the Council's elected members.  5 Only prosecution for deliberate crimes, permanent disability, incompatibility arising during the term of office or serious non-fulfilment of obligations can be causes for dismissal.   
     6   3 Formal independence: a necessary but insufficient condition Although independence must be based on a sound legal framework, formal “independence” is a necessary but insufficient condition for independent agencies. Independence must be effective and, therefore, it must be credible. In other words, an “independent” agency must be recognised by society as one that operates independently within its area of competence. This requires there to be complete trust that its actions are governed exclusively by true and fair compliance with the mandate entrusted to it, because this is the best way in which to serve the general interest. In consequence, connecting channels with society must be maintained and reinforced. This should result in a pro-active exercise in institutional transparency and accountability in the fulfilment of our mandate, as I shall detail later. Moreover, nor can we forget that an independent agency’s efficiency is not impervious to its surroundings. Accordingly, to preserve the independence and prevent overload of these institutions, it must be recognised that their performance also depends on actions taken in other economic policy areas.6 Monetary policy is an evident example of this, especially in a monetary union such as ours in which the single monetary policy coexists with each country’s own macroeconomic policies. Indeed, the governance of Economic and Monetary Union recognises the need for the single monetary policy to be accompanied by fiscal and structural policies consistent with economic stability. With this goal in mind, a wide range of coordination and supervision mechanisms have been put in place, such as the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) and the Macroeconomic Imbalance Procedure. Such considerations are also applicable to other areas of activity of independent institutions, such as financial stability and banking supervision in the case of the Banco de España. Indeed, these considerations justify central banks’ frequent calls for an appropriate economic policy mix. And it is in this framework of assurance of economic stability that citizens and politicians should place declarations by the independent monetary authority on economic policy conduct in general. In this respect, as I indicated earlier, the functions of the Banco de España include advising the Government and producing reports and studies. The present crisis provides us with a good example. The robust monetary policy actions of the ECB, necessary as they were, would have been insufficient had it acted alone. The various fiscal expansion measures taken by national governments and, fortunately on this occasion, also by the European Union overall, have been decisive and have supplemented those adopted by the monetary authority. Similarly, post-crisis, monetary policy efficiency and the necessary macroeconomic stability will require that fiscal authorities apply budget policies that ensure that public finances are sound. This means that once the recovery is                                                                                               6 One obligation that the ECB and the NCBs must fulfil in their actions, which is necessarily linked to their independence and key to ensuring price stability, is the prohibition of monetary financing. This prohibits central banks from financing obligations incurred by the public sector with third parties. This prohibition is laid down in Article 123 of the TFEU and Article 13(2) of the Law of Autonomy of the Banco de España. Pursuant to those provisions, overdraft facilities or any other type of credit facility with the ECB or with the NCBs in favour of European Union and Member State public authorities and bodies are prohibited, as is the purchase directly from them by the ECB or NCBs of debt instruments. The scope of the prohibition of monetary financing is specified in Council Regulation (EC) No 3603/93 of 13 December 1993. The ECB monitors closely compliance with the prohibition of monetary financing as part of Article 271(d) of the TFEU and prepares annual reports on the NCBs’ fulfilment of this obligation. In addition, the ECB has clarified the scope of this prohibition in its Convergence Reports and in the opinions issued in response to consultations on draft legislative provisions submitted to the ECB by the Member States in accordance with Articles 127(4) and 282(5) of the TFEU (Convergence Report 2020). 
     7   firmly entrenched, fiscal consolidation policies will have to be resumed in accordance with the SGP rules.  4 Possible ways to strengthen and enhance the Banco de España’s independence Now I wish to concentrate on a number of possible ways to enhance our independence. These may ultimately also be applicable, in some cases, to other economic supervisors. I will start by referring to the personal independence of the institution’s senior officials. Our current system, whereby it is the Prime Minister who appoints the Governor, is a practice followed in a very high proportion of countries.7 In our case, however, I believe it would be appropriate to grant Parliament a bigger role in the appointment of the Governor, the Deputy Governor and the elected members of the Governing Council, provided in all cases that the process is rapid and that posts are not left vacant. Parliament’s role could be instrumented through appearances in Parliament prior to the appointment, or through confirmation of the appointment or of the suitability and technical and professional sufficiency of the proposed candidates. Involving Parliament in the appointment process would, in my view, raise the public’s perception of the independence and legitimacy of the senior officials. This would have a positive impact on the prestige of our institution, on the trust we inspire in society and on the performance of our functions. In addition, making the Banco de España’s senior management selection process more visible should contribute to fulfilling the legal requirements whereby the Governor and the Deputy Governor must have “recognised competence in monetary or banking matters” and the Council Members “recognised competence in economics or law”. Participation of the legislature in the Banco de España’s senior management selection processes would be consistent with the procedures followed by the European Parliament to appoint the ECB’s senior management, with the opinion of the Parliament now being binding in the case of the Chair and Vice-Chair of the Supervisory Board. In addition, although it is not the predominant model in the main European countries, the parliaments of some countries, such as Finland, Slovakia, Latvia and Lithuania, play an important role in the appointment of their central bank governors. Beyond Europe, in the United States the appointment of the Chair of the Federal Reserve has to be confirmed by the Senate. Although not usual practice, some countries have also introduced certain transparency standards in the procedure for pre-selecting candidates. The Bank of England is one of the most striking examples, as there is an open pre-selection process for appointment of the Governor and Deputy Governors. In addition, the UK Commissioner for Public Appointments, who is responsible for reviewing the appointments of senior officials of more than 300 public agencies, approves the other appointments on the central bank’s Court of Directors.                                                                                               7 According to Issues in the Governance of Central Banks, a study published by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) in 2009, the power to appoint the Governor of most central banks lies with the Head of State or the Prime Minister (60% of the 47 institutions surveyed), while in 23% it lies with the Government or the Minister for the Economy and in just 11% with Parliament. In turn, according to the OECD (2016), “Being an independent regulator”, in most cases (more than 60%) it is the executive that nominates and appoints the members of senior management of regulators in the countries analysed. 
     8   I believe it would also be desirable to unify to some extent procedures for appointment of the senior officials of the various independent agencies existing in Spain. These procedures are currently highly disparate. The possible introduction of improvements in the appointment of institutions’ senior officials could also be accompanied by a reflection on their terms of office. Terms that extend beyond the electoral cycle are crucial to reinforcing the independence of individuals and, ultimately, of the institutions themselves. A long term of office may also be advantageous from the standpoint of accumulation of experience, and may determine the capacity of influence in the different international fora in which the senior officials of supervisory bodies take part. In this respect, the term of office of the Governor (and of the Deputy Governor and Council Members) of the Banco de España – currently six years, non-renewable in the case of the Governor and the Deputy Governor – although longer than a Parliamentary term, is relatively short by international standards (see Annex 4).8 A good benchmark for the future could be the term of office of the members of the ECB’s Executive Board which is set at eight years and is non-renewable (as is the case at the Bank of England). The explicit prohibition of renewable terms of office is, in my opinion, a key element that should be preserved. While few of our central bank peers share this characteristic, non-renewable terms of office are warranted because they nullify the incentives for the incumbents in the highest positions of authority at those institutions to ingratiate themselves with those who decide on their possible re-election. In the case of the Banco de España, as I have mentioned already, the Governor and the Deputy Governor have non-renewable terms, but the members of the Governing Council do not, since their term is renewable once. Non-renewable terms could therefore also be considered for members of the Governing Council.  Indeed, I believe that it would make sense to seek to standardise the criteria for terms of office and their non-renewability across the various independent bodies in Spain. I wish now to focus on another aspect I consider relevant to strengthening the independence of the Banco de España and, in particular, its supervisory function. As I have just stated, the Banco de España has decision-making capacity over the performance of its functions. However, non-monetary policy acts and decisions (such as those concerning the imposition of supervisory sanctions) may, under the Law of Autonomy of the Banco de España,9 be subject to government review via the lodging of an administrative appeal at the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Digital Transformation. This ministry may thus review — and potentially annul —decisions made by the Banco de España.10 To avoid this possible government interference, it should be established that supervisory decisions by the Banco de España bring administrative proceedings to an end or, in other words, that                                                                                               8 The average term of office of governors of the Eurosystem national central banks is more than ten years, assuming where this is legally possible that they are renewed once. 9 Note that when explaining the configuration of the Banco de España the preamble to the Law of Autonomy of the Banco de España states the following: “In sum, the law makes the Bank a special institution within the administration; it is subordinate to the government in general terms but nonetheless enjoys full autonomy in the area of monetary policy, so as better to defend the objective of price stability set out in the law itself.” 10 This is an issue that the International Monetary Fund (IMF) has highlighted on several occasions. See, for example, Technical Note on Supervision of Spanish Banks, No. 17/345, IMF, November 2017, in which the IMF concludes: “The MdE (Ministry of Economy) is the appeals body for submissions by aggrieved parties against BdE (Banco de España) decisions, including sanctions. Such an appeals mechanism has the potential, at least in theory, for government interference.” 
     9   administrative appeals against its decisions may not be lodged at the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Digital Transformation. Of course, such decisions could still be contested in the courts. This change would equate the Banco de España’s supervisory decisions, which generally refer to less significant institutions, with those of the ECB in relation to significant institutions. In tandem with greater Banco de España independence in the supervisory realm, it could be useful to strengthen the governance of decision-making in this arena. In this connection, the Governing Council of the Banco de España currently comprises, aside from the Deputy Governor and myself, six elected members and two ex officio members. The latter sit on the council by virtue of their position, namely: the Vice-Chair of the CNMV and the General Secretary of the Treasury and International Financing.11 It has traditionally been argued that the ex officio members allow for enhanced coordination across the country’s various economic and financial authorities. However, such coordination was boosted recently via the creation in 2019 of AMCESFI, the new macroprudential authority, in which the three sectoral supervisors and the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Digital Transformation participate. Against this background, and in the interest of increasing the institution’s independence, it might be desirable for the ex officio members to attend the meetings of the Governing Council of the Banco de España in a non-voting capacity, and for the Banco de España representative at the CNMV to do likewise.  5 Financial supervision arrangements in Spain I would also like to underscore that, precisely after redressing a significant shortcoming detected in the Spanish financial supervisory system by creating a Spanish macroprudential authority, I believe that it is now time to start reflecting deeply on the financial supervisory model existing in Spain.12 This would serve to align it with international best practices and adapt it to the challenges we currently face. The supervisory model is relevant from many standpoints, since it may have a bearing on how efficiently and effectively the goals pursued are attained and ought to resolve possible conflicts of interest across the different areas supervised. In this connection, it should be noted that, after the 2008 global financial crisis, some countries have changed their supervisory models, broadly speaking, by adopting more integrated models and increasing the role of central banks. Among these integrated models I wish to highlight one structured around two separate bodies: a central bank,13 charged with prudential supervision, i.e. the solvency of banks, securities firms and insurance companies, and a second body to oversee all intermediaries’ conduct and protect the investors and customers of various financial products and services.                                                                                                11 The Directors General, the staff representative and the General Secretary of the Banco de España also attend the Governing Council’s meetings in a non-voting capacity. In addition, the General Secretary acts as the Governing Council's secretary.  12 For a more detailed discussion on this matter, see F. Restoy (2016), La organización de la supervisión financiera, or J. Segura (2018), “La supervisión financiera”, Chapter 3 of Reguladores y supervisores económicos independientes: el caso español, coordinated by J. Segura. For a recent description of supervisory models around the world, see D. Calvo, J.C. Crisanto, S. Hohl and O. Pascual Gutiérrez (2018), “Financial supervisory architecture: what has changed after the crisis?”, FSI Insights on policy implementation, No 8.  13 Integrating prudential supervision increases the coordination between the provision of liquidity to the banking sector and oversight of its solvency. This strengthens financial stability.  
     10   The principle of separating prudential supervision from the supervision of conduct, with each of these two functions discharged for the entire financial system by separate institutions, should, in my opinion, be a core part of the reflection on the improvements that can be made to the financial supervisory model in Spain.  In my opinion, the responsibilities for preserving the financial soundness of all financial institutions irrespective of their nature (banks, insurance companies and securities firms, etc.) — including independent decision-making capacity over the use of macroprudential tools — and for ensuring such institutions conduct themselves appropriately in their relationships with their customers,14 should be separated and assigned to different authorities (the Banco de España and the CNMV, respectively). This would, in my view, be an optimal institutional framework for managing possible conflicts between these two responsibilities and for making supervisory activity more efficient and effective, especially against a backdrop of increasing interconnectedness between financial sector players, with the emergence of increasing numbers of financial conglomerates. Moreover, there are obvious synergies in the joint supervision of such conglomerates, using similar approaches, methodologies and resources. Having a single national macroprudential authority (the aforementioned AMCESFI) should ensure the required close coordination between these authorities. Under this arrangement, the AMCESFI’s key objective is to facilitate that coordination.  Here we should also include the functions relating to the resolution of financial institutions, which in Spain are separated into the preventive resolution authority (the Banco de España) and the executive resolution authority (the FROB),15 within the framework of the European Single Resolution Mechanism. This is a more complex arrangement than found in other countries, where, with rare exceptions, the two resolution functions are united under the same banking supervision authority (in Spain, the Banco de España). Combining the two under the banking supervisor can be justified on the grounds of economies of information and cost, and consistency vis-à-vis assessing the implications for financial stability. In any event, changes to financial supervision arrangements such as I have outlined should come in parallel with the corresponding adjustments to the governance frameworks of those institutions whose functions are amended.  6 Governance, transparency and accountability As I have emphasised, in addition to independence, the independent authorities must have the highest transparency and accountability standards, since these are vital for conferring legitimacy upon them.  Accountability by independent bodies and authorities for their actions and activities should preferably be before Parliament. This requirement is formally enshrined for the Banco de España by two means. First, there is parliamentary control over the Banco de España’s                                                                                               14 Supervision of conduct is more than just resolving conflicts or user complaints since it includes, among other facets, verifying that financial products are marketed properly, controlling advertising and assessing whether transparency and consumer protection rules are correctly applied.   15 The FROB is also responsible for the management and future divestment of the State’s holdings – resulting from the government support provided during the crisis – in the capital of banks subject to restructuring plans.  
     11   budget, balance sheet and profit and loss account, which are submitted to Parliament via the Government. The Banco de España also regularly submits reports to Parliament, such as the Annual Report, the Institutional Report, the Report on Banking Supervision and the Report on Sanctioning Measures. Stipulated as part of this accountability before Parliament is the Governor’s appearance before the Economic Committee of the Congress of Deputies, to present the Annual Report prepared by our institution. This report provides a detailed assessment of developments in the Spanish economy and its main challenges. Likewise, the Governor of the Banco de España is expected to regularly appear before the Parliamentary and Senate Budget Committees to assess the content of the Draft State and Social Security Budget. Complementing these regular appearances, there have been occasional testimonies before various committees, such as the recent appearance before the Parliamentary Committee for the Social and Economic Reconstruction of Spain after COVID-19. In my opinion, this accountability mechanism should be reinforced with more regular appearances by the Governor before Parliament. Specifically, it may be appropriate for the Governor to appear periodically to present the Banco de España’s view of the economic situation, monetary policy and the financial system, and to report on the institution’s actions and plans within the various areas under its remit. Institutional transparency is also a basic principle for the proper functioning of independent public authorities, given that confidence in and the credibility of these institutions are the basis for their effectiveness. In this respect, the Banco de España has a Transparency Portal16 where it publishes institutional and planning information (functions, legal framework, organisational structure, plans and schedules, codes of conduct, the calendars of the Governor and the Deputy Governor, and personal data processing records), information of legal importance (documents with legal effects; documents subject to public consultation; reports, technical applications and guidelines; documents from international organisations), and miscellaneous economic information (contracts, agreements, management delegation agreements and concession contracts, cultural and social work, budget management, annual accounts, salaries of governing body members and senior directors, conflicts of interest of public employees, fixed assets and official vehicles, historical objects and art collection). The Banco de España also has a long-standing tradition of publishing statistics and analysis and research reports, including the Annual Report, the Financial Stability Report, the Economic Bulletin and the Statistical Bulletin. In addition to the information provided on our website, the Banco de España runs specific web portals such as the Bank Customer Portal; the Education Portal and Finance for All (on financial literacy); and portals encouraging the use of e-administration, such as the Virtual Office. Looking ahead, we have set ourselves the objective of improving the quality of our statistics and publications, along with their clarity and accessibility, bringing them within reach of the broadest possible audience. I would also like to share with you our commitment to taking a more active role in directly explaining to the public the rationale behind the main economic decisions, in addition to the associated operating rules, their main characteristics and all those aspects that shape the economic and financial environment. Accordingly, we intend to broaden the Bank’s participation in those academic,                                                                                               16 https://www.bde.es/bde/es/secciones/sobreelbanco/Transparencia/  
     12   professional and social fora where our presence may prove beneficial. This includes the use of new communication instruments, such as the recent opening of several social media accounts, and regular contact with the press to explain our activities and the content of our reports. We also aim to build on our long-standing initiatives in the fields of information, education and financial literacy. Here, I would also like to underline our commitment to further improving the institution’s transparency. For instance, in the Transparency Portal we are providing more detailed information on the calendars and appearances of the Governor and the Deputy Governor, and documents pertaining to the integrity expected of our high-level officials. In addition, both the Deputy Governor and I, as representatives of the ECB’s Supervisory Board and the Governing Council, respectively, have signed a new code of conduct.17 This increases our personal commitment to the highest ethical standards in order to ensure our independence from the public and private sector and avoid potential conflicts of interest. In this connection, I wish to emphasise the desirability and timeliness of independent public institutions having this type of ethical conduct framework, as a key element to proper performance by their high-level officials of their roles. From this standpoint, the aforementioned Code of Conduct for high-level European Central Bank Officials includes ethical conduct criteria that are particularly relevant to independence, impartiality, professional secrecy and public and private appearances by those high-level officials, in addition to specific obligations for avoiding conflicts of interest, for relationships with interest groups, for private financial transactions and for advantages, awards and invitations offered as a result of their positions (for more details, see Annex 5). As I reported to this very Parliament, early this year the Banco de España approved its Strategic Plan, whose essential content has been made public. Based on an analysis of the challenges facing the institution and its main strengths and weaknesses, the plan sets out the priority objectives for the coming years and the actions required to accomplish them. Aside from the importance of this exercise from the standpoint of internal coordination, I believe the drawing up and publication of this plan is a fundamental transparency-enhancing factor that will facilitate evaluation of the effectiveness of the Bank’s actions. Accordingly, under the Strategic Plan our activities will be subject to assessments. Should you see fit, we could report to this House on the content of the Strategic Plan, headway made in its implementation and the results of the assessments. I will now turn to another aspect that is key to understanding the correct configuration of an independent authority: good governance. This is understood not only in terms of observing certain basic principles of public action (such as efficacy and effectiveness) or of impartiality and due diligence, but also of implementing procedures and collegiate decisions to ensure that the primary institutional course of action is to uphold the public interest. As I have already said, the Banco de España has collegiate bodies, such as the Governing Council and the Executive Board. These, along with the Governor and the Deputy Governor, make up its governing bodies. The fact that these collegiate bodies have broad powers in relation to the functions of the Bank and that a majority (six) of the members of the Governing Council are elected and have recognised competence in the field of economics, the financial system or the legal arena, reinforces the independence of our institution.                                                                                                17 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:52019XB0308(01)&from=EN 
     13   A further good governance practice is having a structure of committees to support the governing bodies. These are able to appropriately assess and address the various matters that fall within the organisation’s remit, ensuring an overall view and that all the relevant areas of the institution participate in the analysis of the issue concerned. This is the situation currently existing at the Banco de España, which has a solid structure based on an Audit Committee and 12 other committees, some with a very significant mandate, such as the Steering Committee and the recently created Financial Stability Committee.  This modus operandi is particularly important for the analysis of economic policy in general, and of monetary policy in particular, as well as for the exercise of supervisory powers, given the complexity of the environment and regulations, the profusion of data, the influence of external and internal factors and the different elements that need to be taken into consideration to assess the probability and severity of the risks. All of this means that every possible viewpoint of experts of proven experience and specialisation is required, to ensure that the responsible bodies are in a position to take the most appropriate decisions.  This way of proceeding is also the one most commonly used by our central bank and supervisory peers. It is embedded, for example, in the structure of the ECB, which includes various committees supporting its decision-making bodies, with representatives from all NCBs and the ECB, and in that of the SSM, which is based on joint supervisory teams (JSTs) of staff of the ECB and the national authorities who participate in formulating the proposals that are submitted to the Supervisory Board. This body decides on the action to take in this area on a collegiate basis, through the high-level representatives of which it is composed. The Supervisory Board’s decisions are finally submitted, by means of a non-objection procedure, to the Governing Council of the ECB, which is ultimately responsible for their adoption. As regards actions relating to less significant institutions, which the Banco de España supervises directly, the procedures and reports have been progressively aligned with ECB practices, a process that will continue going forward. Finally, and in the same direction of improving our institutional governance, my intention is to continue to foster the collegiate functioning of our governing bodies, and to strengthen the functioning of our committees.  There I shall finish and now I remain at the disposal of the House for any questions or clarifications.    
     1  ANNEX 1 The Banco de España’s participation in the Eurosystem  1   Participation in the European System of Central Banks  1.1 The Eurosystem The Eurosystem is the monetary authority of the euro area and is made up of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the national central banks (NCBs) of the Member States whose currency is the euro, one of which is the Banco de España.1  The primary objective of the Eurosystem is to maintain price stability in accordance with Article 127(1) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU). According to this article, the Eurosystem shall also support the general economic policies in the Union. To pursue the fundamental objective of price stability, the Eurosystem has the basic function of defining and implementing the monetary policy. It has also been entrusted with other basic functions, such as conducting foreign-exchange operations consistent with the exchange rate policy established, holding and managing the official foreign-exchange reserves of the Member States, and promoting the smooth operation of payment systems. Since 2014, under Article 127(6) of the TFEU and Council Regulation (EU) No 1024/2013 (the “SSM regulation”), the ECB is responsible for specific tasks relating to the prudential supervision of banks located in the participating Member States. The ECB performs these functions within the framework of a Single Supervisory Mechanism made up of the ECB and the national competent authorities, as explained in Part 2 of this Annex. Finally, the ECB has the exclusive right to authorise the issue of banknotes in the euro area, to compile and produce statistics in collaboration with the NCBs in the performance of their functions, and to issue reports on consultations on legislative initiatives of the EU or of the national authorities concerning its sphere of competence. The organisation of the Eurosystem is based on the principle of decentralisation. Decision-making is centralised, while the implementation of decisions is decentralised. In practice, the NCBs perform almost all operational tasks of the Eurosystem: they conduct the monetary policy operations and, as agents of the ECB, manage its foreign reserve holdings, provide payment and securities settlement facilities and ensure the manufacture, issue and post-issue handling of euro banknotes. They also collect statistics for the ECB, collaborate with the ECB on translation and the production of publications and contribute to economic analysis and research. The NCBs also collaborate on the preparation of the appropriate decisions to be adopted by the decision-making bodies of the Eurosystem through participation in various committees of NCB experts, which meet regularly to advise them and supply them with expert views on various matters. Around 300 Banco de España experts collaborate through their participation in such committees and in their subgroups.  The Eurosystem is run by the ECB’s decision-making bodies,2 principally the Executive Board and the Governing Council. In addition, the General Council is the ECB’s third                                                                                               1 The Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union refers to the European System of Central Banks (ESCB) and not to the Eurosystem because when it was drafted it was assumed that all the EU Member States would adopt the euro. The ESCB is made up of the ECB and the NCBs of all the EU Member States, whether or not they have adopted the euro. The Eurosystem and the ESCB will continue to coexist as long as there are EU Members States that do not belong to the euro area.  2 Their nature and functioning is governed by the TFEU, the Statute of the ESCB and the internal regulations (of the ECB, Executive Board, General Council and Supervisory Board). 
     2  decision-making body, of which the governors, presidents or chairmen of all the EU central banks are members with advisory and coordination competences in relation to the ESCB. Finally, the Supervisory Board is an internal ECB body responsible for planning and carrying out the ECB’s tasks in relation to the prudential supervision of credit institutions (see Part 2 of this Annex).  1.2 The Executive Board of the ECB The Executive Board of the ECB is the decision-making body responsible for managing the day-to-day business of the ECB and implementing the policies of the Eurosystem. The Executive Board usually meets once a week and more frequently if necessary. Formally, decisions are adopted by simple majority, although in practice, as in the case of the Governing Council, the Executive Board acts as a collegiate body and seeks consensus. Among other tasks it is responsible for: i) preparing the meetings of the Governing Council, presenting the proposed decisions, and ii) implementing the monetary policy in accordance with the guidelines specified and decisions taken by the Governing Council, giving the necessary instructions to the euro area NCBs. It is composed of the President of the ECB, the Vice-President and four other members selected from among persons of recognised standing and professional experience in monetary or banking matters. The members of the Executive Board are appointed, by qualified majority, by the heads of state or government of the euro area countries, on a recommendation from the Council of the European Union, after it has consulted the European Parliament and the Governing Council of the ECB. The term of office of the members of the Executive Board is eight years and cannot be renewed. As a member of the Executive Board, the ECB President occupies a prominent position and exercises exclusively certain reserved functions and, if absent, these functions are performed by the Vice-President: chairing meetings of the Governing Council, the General Council and the Executive Board of the ECB; representing the ECB abroad; and presenting the ECB’s annual report to the EU Council and to the European Parliament. Additionally, the President is invited to attend certain meetings of the European Council (Heads of State or Government) and participates regularly in meetings of the EU Council in its configuration as the Economic and Financial Affairs Council (ECOFIN) and in the Eurogroup. 1.3 The Governing Council of the ECB Under the TFEU and the Statute, the ECB’s Governing Council is assigned the power to adopt the most important and strategically significant decisions for the Eurosystem. The Governing Council usually meets twice a month – with the possibility of convening other ad hoc meetings, if necessary – and it also approves a large number of decisions on a daily basis using the so-called “written procedure” (which is explained below). Monetary policy decisions are adopted every six weeks and, although the minutes of these meetings are confidential, the Governing Council publishes an account of its deliberations one month after the meeting. The Governor of the Banco de España, as a governor of an NCB of the euro area, is a member of the Governing Council, together with six members of the ECB’s Executive Board and the other governors of euro area NCBs. When Governing Council members adopt monetary policy decisions and perform other functions of the Eurosystem, they are not acting as representatives of their countries or respective central banks, but rather on a personal and independent basis with the obligation to safeguard the interests of the Union as a whole. Membership of this decision-making body is personal and inalienable. 
     3  The President of the EU Council or of the Eurogroup and one European Commission member may attend Governing Council meetings, albeit without the right to vote.  Quorum and voting regime at the Governing Council Governing Council decisions are generally adopted by consensus. If its members have to resort to voting, the Statute provides specific voting rules for each subject, although the general rule is voting by simple majority. Governing Council meetings require a quorum of two-thirds of the members having a voting right. Therefore, 14 voting rights would be needed out of a total of 21 (the Executive Board Members hold six voting rights and the other 15 voting rights are rotated among the 19 governors).3 If the quorum is not met, the President may convene an extraordinary meeting at which decisions may be taken without regard to the quorum.  The ECB can adopt its decisions by simple or qualified majority, weighted simple or qualified majority, or unanimously. In accordance with Article 10(2) of the Statute, the unweighted simple majority regime is the default procedure generally applicable and takes into account the rotation system. This involves the favourable vote of half of its members with voting rights plus one (11), where abstentions count as a “no”. In the event of a tie, the President has the casting vote. Monetary policy decisions are adopted by simple majority.4 Adoption of decisions by the written procedure at the Governing Council The Governing Council adopts a large number of decisions on a daily basis using the written procedure (Art. 4(7) of the ECB's Rules of Procedure). More than 1,200 decisions were adopted using the written procedure in 2019; less than 1% of them had to be submitted to a physical meeting to facilitate discussion, after comments had been received from Council members. 1.4 The General Council of the ECB The General Council of the ECB is composed of the President and the Vice-President of the ECB and the governors of the NCBs of all 27 EU Member States. It meets every three months and decisions are adopted by simple majority, unless provided otherwise by the Statute of the ESCB. The President of the ECB must keep the General Council informed of the decisions adopted by the Governing Council. Under the Statute of the ESCB, the                                                                                               3 As from 1 January 2015, when Lithuania joined the euro area and the number of 18 countries was exceeded, a system of rotating voting rights, agreed by the EU Council in 2003, came into operation in order to ensure that the ECB would be able to continue to take decisions efficiently and swiftly. Under the provisions of Art. 10(2) of the Statute, two groups of countries have been formed at present according to the size of their economies and their financial sectors. The first group of five governors has four voting rights and the second group of 14 governors has 11 voting rights.  4 The unweighted qualified majority regime (two-thirds of the votes) is used in very specific cases such as that envisaged by Art. 14(4) of the Statute regarding the performance of functions by the NCBs which might interfere with the objectives and the tasks of the Eurosystem. Where decisions are adopted by weighted majority (Art. 10(3) of the Statute), the rotation of voting rights does not apply. In these cases, an alternate or substitute appointed for the meeting is allowed to vote, which is not permitted for other voting. The votes of the Executive Board have a weighting of zero. The weighted simple majority regime is envisaged for decisions on the subscription of capital and adjustments to shares (Art. 28 of the Statute), on the key for capital subscription (Art. 29 of the Statute) or on the allocation of monetary income to central banks (Art. 32 of the Statute) or of losses and net profits to central banks (Art. 33 of the Statute). Where decisions are adopted by weighted qualified majority, half of the shareholders (10) and two-thirds of the subscribed capital are needed. The type of decisions adopted using this regime are those affecting increases in and payments of capital of the ECB (Art. 28(1) and 28(3) of the Statute) and alternative methods for measuring monetary income (Art. 32(3)). Lastly, very few decisions are taken unanimously; they require the attendance of all members at the meeting. The Recommendation of the ECB addressed to the European Council for the amendment of Art. 10(2) of the Statute (assignment of voting rights and rotation system in the Governing Council of the ECB) was adopted unanimously.   
     4  General Council can be regarded as a “transitional body” which will continue to exist while there are EU Member States which have not adopted the euro. Its functions include the monitoring of progress achieved in convergence by EU Member States which have not yet adopted the euro, advice on the necessary preparations for irrevocably fixing their exchange rates, supervising the operation of Exchange Rate Mechanism II, acting as a forum for the coordination of EU exchange rate and monetary policies, and assisting with certain activities, such as the advisory functions of the ECB.  2   Single Supervisory Mechanism: distribution of responsibilities between the ECB and the national competent authorities and decision-making processes As from 4 November 2014, the prudential supervision of credit institutions in euro area countries was transferred to the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM), which other EU countries that have not yet adopted the euro may also join.5 This mechanism is structured as an integrated system, led by the ECB and involving the national competent authorities (NCAs), i.e. the supervisors of the participating countries. The SSM Regulation conferred on the ECB a large part of the prudential supervision competences that had hitherto been the remit of the NCAs.6 However, a distinction has been drawn between what are known as “significant institutions”,7 which are supervised directly by the ECB (currently 113 institutions representing nearly 82% of total banking assets in the participating countries), and “less significant institutions”, which will continue to be supervised directly by the NCAs and indirectly by the ECB, with the main aim of ensuring they are treated consistently across the area. The tasks of granting authorisation to credit institutions (and, when appropriate, the withdrawal thereof) and of assessing proposals to acquire qualifying holdings are conferred on the ECB irrespective of whether the institutions are significant or not (“common procedures”).  In any case, the ECB is ultimately responsible for the supervision of all credit institutions of participating countries, and may adopt regulations or issue guidelines or general instructions to ensure consistent supervision across the SSM. It may also assume the direct supervision of less significant institutions whenever it deems necessary to ensure consistent supervision.                                                                                               5 In October 2020, the supervisors of Bulgaria and Croatia — countries that have not yet adopted the euro — began “close cooperation” with the ECB. This is the mechanism envisaged for countries outside the euro area to join the SSM.  6 Authorising credit institutions; authorising the acquisition of qualifying holdings; ensuring compliance with EU legislation on prudential and governance requirements; conducting supervision on a consolidated basis over credit institutions; conducting supervisory reviews and stress tests; participating in supplementary supervision of financial conglomerates; performing supervisory tasks in relation to credit institutions’ recovery plans and the adoption of early intervention measures.  7 The criteria for determining whether a credit institution is considered significant are the following: — Size and economic importance: total consolidated assets exceed €30 billion or 20% of the GDP of the country where the institution is established, or it is one of the three largest institutions of a Member State. — Cross-border activity: it has subsidiaries in more than one participating country, whose cross-border assets or liabilities represent more than 20% of its total assets or liabilities. — Public financial assistance: it has received or requested direct financial assistance from the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) or the European Stability Mechanism (ESM).  
     5  The SSM Regulation also provides for the task of adopting measures in pursuance of macroprudential stability to be conferred on the ECB.8 To ensure full coordination with the national designated authorities in this area, the latter must give advance notice of their intention to activate macroprudential tools to the ECB, which may object to it. At the same time, the ECB may apply more stringent measures than those envisaged at the national level, giving sufficient notice to the national designated authorities, which may raise objections for their consideration by the ECB. The design of the SSM’s governance arrangements was conditioned by the governance structure of the ECB, whose decision-making bodies are the Governing Council and the Executive Board, as set out in the TFEU and its Statute. With the two-fold aim of ensuring that the assumption of new supervisory competences by the ECB does not jeopardise its independence in the determination and implementation of monetary policy, and of allowing all national supervisors to participate in the ECB’s decision-making (given that prudential supervision is not the responsibility of central banks in all Member States and that national authorities are not represented in the Governing Council), the SSM Regulation established a new internal body, the Supervisory Board, responsible for planning and carrying out supervisory tasks.  The Supervisory Board comprises a Chair (appointed for a non-renewable term of five years), a Vice-Chair (chosen from among the members of the ECB’s Executive Board), four ECB representatives and one representative from each national supervisor. It is currently made up of 27 members with voting rights: its Chair, its Vice-Chair,9  four ECB representatives and the representatives of the 21 NCAs of the participating Member States. In the case of Spain, the representative of the Banco de España, in its capacity as national supervisory authority, is the Deputy Governor. Each member has one vote10 (in the event of a tie, the Chair has the casting vote) and decisions are generally taken by simple majority, except for those relating to the adoption of regulations implementing the tasks conferred on the ECB, which are taken by qualified majority. All representatives on the Supervisory Board have a duty to act in the interests of the Union as a whole and not in those of the country or authority they represent. The Supervisory Board proposes draft supervisory decisions to the Governing Council of the ECB, which is ultimately responsible for adopting them.11 To this end, a “non-objection” procedure has been established, under which the Governing Council may approve or object to (within a maximum period of ten days) the proposals submitted by the Supervisory Board, but may under no circumstance modify them.12 Where the Governing Council objects to a                                                                                               8As noted in Recital 14 of the SSM Regulation, capital buffers to ensure that credit institutions accumulate, during periods of economic growth, a sufficient capital base to absorb losses in stressed periods, specific systemic institution buffers, and other measures aimed at addressing systemic or macroprudential risk are key prudential tools.  9 In both cases, the appointment requires the approval of the European Parliament. By contrast, the appointment of the Chair, the Vice-Chair or the other members of the ECB’s Executive Board only require the non-binding opinion of the European Parliament (Article 26(3) of the SSM Regulation).  10 In countries where supervisory competences lie with an institution other than the central bank, a representative of the latter can also attend meetings, although only one vote per country is counted.  11 To prevent conflicts of interest between monetary policy and supervisory powers, the ECB ensures a separation of objectives, decision-making, processes and tasks. This includes strict separation of the Governing Council’s meetings.  12 This procedure does not apply to ECB decisions relating to its general framework, which are adopted by the Governing Council in accordance with the ECB’s standard procedures, following a proposal of the Executive Board. Nor does it apply to macroprudential decisions, which are proposed by the Supervisory Board and may be approved, rejected or amended by the Governing Council.  
     6  draft decision (which has not yet been the case), it is returned to the Supervisory Board, which will examine the Governing Council’s reasons and submit a new draft decision. To resolve any differences of views expressed in this interaction, the SSM Regulation provides for the creation of a Mediation Panel, on which each Member State has a representative chosen from among the members of the Governing Council and the Supervisory Board. This mediation process is activated at the request of one or more NCAs, when they fail to agree with the rationale for the objection raised by the Governing Council. The ongoing supervision of significant institutions is the responsibility of the so-called joint supervisory teams (JST), formed by staff from the ECB and the NCAs of the countries in which the institutions are located. Each JST is led by a coordinator at the ECB, who is supported by one or more sub-coordinators from the NCA. In order to foster neutrality, every attempt is made to ensure that coordinators are not from the home country of the supervised institution, and that they change institutions on a regular basis (three to five years). The ECB is responsible for defining the size and composition of the JSTs, which vary depending on the complexity of the supervised institution.13  The NCAs retain key tasks both in SSM supervisory processes and decision-making. These notably include: (i) Tasks outside the scope of the SSM. NCAs remain exclusively in charge of overseeing certain key areas of banking (consumer protection, prevention of money laundering and terrorist financing, and oversight of financial markets), and of supervising institutions other than credit institutions. (ii) Tasks assigned to the NCAs within the SSM framework. The responsibility for the exercise of the powers conferred on the ECB is distributed between the ECB and the NCAs.  - Less significant institutions: NCAs conduct the direct supervision of these institutions and retain their power to adopt independently any supervisory decisions they deem necessary (except those relating to the “common procedures”), duly informing the ECB.  - Significant institutions: NCAs play a pivotal role in the JSTs (they contribute the staff, experience and knowledge of the country’s institutions and banking system), and the on-site inspection teams are mostly from that country. Moreover, NCAs have an important role in a number of administrative procedures. For example, NCAs are responsible for submitting to the ECB the proposals relating to the “common procedures”. (iii) New tasks arising from membership of the SSM. The governors of NCBs and representatives from NCAs take part in the decision-making process in the Governing Council and the Supervisory Board of the ECB, respectively (not only decisions concerning institutions in their countries but also SSM decisions overall). In addition, the NCAs participate actively in a broad range of networks of experts and working groups set up by the SSM to conduct discussions at a technical level, particularly on issues of a horizontal nature.                                                                                                  13 For institutions operating in several countries, a “core JST” is set up, comprising an ECB coordinator (who is also the chair) and national sub-coordinators. 
     7  ANNEX 2 - Functions of the governing bodies of the Banco de España In accordance with the provisions of Articles 17 to 23 of Law 13/1994 of 1 June 1994 of Autonomy of the Banco de España, and of its Internal Rules, the functions of the governing bodies of the Banco de España are, essentially, the following: 1 Powers of the Governor   Run the institution and preside over the Governing Council and the Executive Commission.  Act as the Bank's legal representative to all effects and purposes, especially in the Courts of Justice.  Authorise contracts and documents and perform all other activities necessary for the conduct of the functions conferred on the Banco de España.  Represent the Banco de España at those institutions and international organisations in which its participation may be envisaged.  Sit on the Governing Council and the General Council of the European Central Bank (ECB).  Represent the Banco de España before the Spanish Parliament, acting as the channel for providing parliamentary access to Banco de España information that falls under the secrecy obligation, and attending the sessions of the parliamentary committees at which his/her presence is required under parliamentary regulations or national law  Manage, at the highest level, all the services of the Banco de España, and sign any documents, such as minutes and circulars that he/she is required to formalise.   Propose to the Government the appointment of the Deputy Governor. Moreover, the Governor shall be heard by the Minister for the Economy about the appointment of six members of the Governing Council.  Propose to the Governing Council the Council members that shall form part of the Executive Commission.  Propose to the Executive Commission the appointment and dismissal of the Directors General, for ratification by the Governing Council.  The Governor shall have the powers delegated by the Governing Council or the Executive Commission. 2 Powers of the Deputy Governor  Manage, at the highest level, the common internal services of the Banco de España.  Stand in for the Governor when the post is vacant or in the event of the latter’s absence or illness.  The Deputy Governor shall have the powers delegated by the Governor, the Governing Council or the Executive Commission. 3 Powers of the Governing Council  Approve the general guidelines of action of the Banco de España so that it may fulfil the functions entrusted to it.  Debate monetary policy matters and supervise the Banco de España’s contribution to implementation of the monetary policy of the European System of Central Banks by the Executive Commission, all in accordance with the ECB’s guidelines and instructions and observing the independence and professional secrecy obligation of the Governor as a member of the ECB’s governing bodies. 
     8   Approve, at the proposal of the Executive Commission, the Banco de España’s Annual Report and, where appropriate, any other reports that it may be required to submit to Parliament, the Government or the Minister for Economy and Finance14.  Approve Monetary Circulars and Banco de España Circulars.  Submit to the Government the proposals for removal from office referred to in Article 25(4)(d) of the Law of Autonomy of the Banco de España.  Approve, at the proposal of the Executive Commission, the Internal Rules of the Banco de España.  Approve the Banco de España’s budget proposal, authorise the annual accounts for issue and approve the proposal for distribution of profit.  Approve the staff policy guidelines and ratify the appointment of Directors General.  Impose penalties the adoption of which falls within the powers of the Banco de España.  Approve penalty proposals to be submitted by the Banco de España to the Minister for Economy and Finance.  Settle appeals or claims against decisions of the Banco de España where it is within its powers to do so.  Adopt any other resolutions necessary to perform the functions entrusted to the Banco de España under the Law of Autonomy that are not the exclusive competence of the Executive Commission.  Designate, at the proposal of the Governor, the two Council members of the Executive Commission and the members of the Audit Committee.  Propose to the Ministry of Public Administration, or issue a report to that effect, the initiation of proceedings against members of the Banco de España’s governing or management bodies, to ascertain responsibilities relating to presumed breaches of any of the obligations established in Articles 6, 26(2) and 28 of the Law of Autonomy of the Banco de España.  Learn, in the immediately following session, of any resolutions of the Executive Commission adopting any kind of precautionary measures against credit institutions.  Be aware of the resolution of the Executive Commission on approval of the Banco de España’s organisation chart and changes to it and on the creation of commissions and committees.  Be informed of delegations and advocations made by the Governor.  4 Powers of the Executive Commission  Contribute to implementation of the monetary policy developed by the European System of Central Banks, in accordance with Article 21(1)(b) of the Law of Autonomy of the Banco de España.  Make decisions on administrative authorisations to be granted by the Banco de España.  Organise the Banco de España and appoint its staff.                                                                                               14 Understood to currently refer to the Minister for Economic Affairs and Digital Transformation. 
     9   Appoint Directors General and set their remuneration in accordance with the relevant provisions of Article 71 of the Internal Rules. The Governing Council shall, in any case, ratify these appointments.  Submit to the Governing Council proposals in respect of which the latter has the power of decision or approval.  Perform tasks expressly delegated to it by the Governing Council.  Submit to credit institutions, and all other supervised institutions, specific requirements and recommendations and resolve to initiate penalty proceedings against such institutions and their governing and management bodies and to adopt control measures, replace directors and take any other precautionary measures entrusted to the Banco de España by law. The Executive Commission shall promptly inform the Governing Council of any such precautionary measures adopted in exercise of these powers.  Manage the Banco de España in the field of private law and avail of its assets.  Adopt resolutions on all other operations or transactions required to be performed by the Banco de España to carry out its functions, delegating to the commissions or persons it may deem appropriate.  Approve the Banco de España’s organisation chart and submit that approval to the Governing Council for purposes of information.  Authorise the creation, composition, form of operation, modification or dissolution of commissions or committees.  Submit to the Governing Council proposed penalties the adoption of which falls within the powers of the Banco de España.  Be aware of and act, as appropriate, in respect of non-compliance with minimum reserves and statistical reporting requirements, in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 2818/98 of the European Central Bank of 1 December 1998 on the application of minimum reserves and Regulation (EC) No 2819/98 of the European Central Bank of 1 December 1998 concerning the consolidated balance sheet of the monetary financial institutions sector.  Draft proposed Circulars and Monetary Circulars for approval by the Governing Council.   Approve internal circulars, to be endorsed by the Governor.  Authorise expenditure and order the related payments.  Submit the Banco de España’s budget proposal, annual accounts and proposal for distribution of profit to the Governing Council for approval.   
     10  ANNEX 3 - Rules for senior officers following termination of office. Spanish and European framework Institution Applicable regulations Limitations Position Term Scope of prohibition Banco de España Law 13/1994 of 1 June 1994 of Autonomy of the Banco de España.  Internal Rules of the Banco de España   Code of Conduct of the Governing Bodies of the Banco de España. Governor and Deputy Governor 2 years Professional activities related to credit institutions, specialised lending institutions and securities markets Elected members 2 years Private banks affected by decisions in which they have participated with their vote In the case of Governing Council members, the prohibition extends to any private entity subject to regulation or supervision by the Banco de España, including Spanish banks within the remit of the SSM Directors-General and Associate Directors-General 2 years Relative prohibition: banks directly related to the duties of the office held (i.e. where Directors-General, the governing bodies at the proposal of Directors-General or persons responsible for their subsidiary bodies, by delegation or substitution, have made or informed decisions in connection with those banks) 6 months (extendable to 12) Absolute prohibition: banks supervised by the Banco de España or in their economic group, and banks or associations representing the collective interests of the former Spanish Central Government Law 3/2015 of 30 March regulating the holding of senior offices in the Central Government Senior officers of the Central Government 2 years  Private banks, or banks in the same group, affected by decisions in which they have participated Officers in a regulatory or supervisory body (including the National Securities Market Commission (CNMV), the National Commission on Markets and Competition (CNMC) and the Nuclear Safety Board CSN) 2 years Private banks that have been subject to their supervision or regulation ECB Code of Conduct for high-level ECB officials (2019/C 89/03) Members of the Governing Council (Gov C), the Supervisory Board (SB), the Executive Board (ExB), the Steering Committee, the Mediation Panel  1 year (extendable to 2 in the case of direct involvement in supervision) Significant or less significant credit institutions 6 months Any other financial institution, and any entity engaged in lobbying in relation to the ECB, or consultancy and/or advocacy for the ECB, or for financial institutions Members of the ExB and the Gov C 1 year Counterparties to the Eurosystem in monetary policy or foreign exchange operations 6 months Payment or settlement system operators, central counterparties and providers of payment instruments subject to ECB oversight Gov C and SB alternates 6 months (extendable to 12 in the case of direct involvement in supervision) Significant or less significant credit institutions 3 months  Any other financial institution and any entity engaged in lobbying in relation to the ECB, or consultancy and/or advocacy for the ECB, or for financial institutions Gov C alternates 6 months Counterparties to the Eurosystem in monetary policy or foreign exchange operations 3 months  Payment or settlement system operators, central counterparties and providers of payment instruments subject to ECB oversight EC Code of Conduct for the Members of the European Commission (2018/C 65/06) President  3 years Lobbying its members or staff in connection with matters for which they were responsible within their portfolio Members 2 years Lobbying its members or staff in connection with matters for which they were responsible within their portfolio 
     11  ANNEX 4 – Governor mandates in European countries: terms of office and renewability ECB 8 years Non-renewable 8 years UK 8 years Non-renewable 8 years  NOTE: The power to renew terms of office has not been used in SI, MT or CY, while it has been used at least once in DE, AT, BE, EE, SK, LV, LT, LU, FI, FR, GR, NL, IT and PT (and in IE prior to the existence of the Eurosystem). Based on the data collected, and considering renewals in those cases where they are possible, the average term of office at the Eurosystem’s NCBs is 11.8 years.   NCB Governor’s term of office Renewable Term of office, assuming one renewal, if allowed BE 5 years YES 10 years DE 8 years YES 16 years EE 7 years YES 14 years IE 7 years YES 14 years GR 6 years YES 12 years ES 6 years Non-renewable  6 years FR 6 years YES (once) 12 years IT 6 years YES (once) 12 years CY 5 years YES 10 years LT 5 years YES (unlimited) 10 years LV 6 years YES (unlimited) 12 years LU 6 years YES 12 years MT 5 years YES 10 years NL 7 years YES 14 years AT 6 years YES 12 years PT 5 years YES (once) 10 years SI 6 years YES 12 years SK 6 years YES (once) 12 years FI 7 years YES 14 years 
     12  ANNEX 5 - Code of Conduct for high-level European Central Bank Officials (2019/C89/03) The main points covered in the Code of Conduct for high-level European Central Bank (ECB) Officials are as follows:  - Standards of ethical conduct: officials shall observe the highest standards of ethical conduct and integrity. They are expected to act honestly, independently, impartially, with discretion and without regard to self-interest. They shall be mindful of the importance of their duties and responsibilities, shall take into account the public character of their functions and shall conduct themselves in a way that inspires ethical conduct within the Eurosystem, the European System of Central Banks and the Single Supervisory Mechanism, and maintains and promotes public trust in the ECB. - Principle of independence: officials shall act independently and objectively in the interest of the Union as a whole, regardless of national or personal interest, and not seek or take instructions from EU institutions, bodies, offices or agencies, from any government of a Member State or from any other body. - Professional secrecy: officials shall not disclose any information covered by the obligation of professional secrecy obtained in the exercise of their duties and responsibilities that has not been made public or is not accessible to the public except deliberately as part of the communication strategy of the ECB. - Separation of the supervisory function from the monetary policy function: officials shall respect the separation of the ECB’s specific tasks concerning policies relating to prudential supervision from its tasks relating to monetary policy, as well as other tasks. - Public appearances and public statements: officials shall carry out their duties and responsibilities as, and consider themselves in public appearances to be, representatives of a high-level ECB body. - Relations with interest groups: while maintaining the open, transparent and regular dialogue with representative associations and civil society required by the Treaty on European Union, officials shall at all times, and in particular in their interactions with interest groups, observe their independence and professional secrecy obligations, and the basic principles established in the Code of Conduct. - Declaration of Interests: officials shall on an annual basis submit to the Ethics Committee, for assessment and onward submission to the President, a signed Declaration of Interests which shall include information about the member’s previous occupational activity, private activities, official mandates and financial interests, as well as about the gainful occupational activity of their spouse or partner, that may raise conflict of interest concerns. - Conflicts of interest: officials shall avoid any situation which may raise conflict of interest concerns. A conflict of interest concern arises where an official has personal interests that may influence, or may be perceived as influencing, the impartial and objective carrying out of their duties and responsibilities and also extends to, but is not limited to, their direct family members (any parent, child, brother or sister), spouses or partners.  - Rules on private financial transactions: officials shall comply with the material rules on private financial transactions laid down in the Ethics Framework of the ECB. It is recommended that officials place their investments under the control of one or more 
     13  recognised portfolio managers who have full discretion for assets which go beyond those required for ordinary, personal and family use. - Other rules: (i) officials shall not solicit, and shall exercise caution when offered, any advantages which are connected in any way with the duties and responsibilities conferred on them; (ii) officials shall be confident that any award, honour or decoration is compatible with their public status and does not compromise their independence or raise conflict of interest concerns; (iii) officials may only accept invitations to widely attended events such as conferences, receptions or cultural events, if their participation is not adverse to the ECB’s interest, and shall observe particular prudence with regard to individual invitations. 
Ariff Ali: Climate change, financial inclusion and inclusive greenfinanceWelcoming remarks by Mr Ariff Ali, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at The RBF-AFI VirtualJoint Learning Programme on Inclusive Green Finance Implementation, 19 October 2020.*   *   *SalutationsAFI Executive Director, Dr Alfred HannigAFI ColleaguesJoint Learning Programme Speakers and ParticipantsLadies and GentlemenIntroductory CommentsNi sa bula vinaka and warm greetings from the Reserve Bank of Fiji (RBF).I have much pleasure in addressing you all at this virtual Joint Learning Programme (JLP) onInclusive Green Finance (IGF) Implementation; an event that is proudly co-hosted by the RBFand AFI.We had initially planned, over a year ago, to host this programme here in Fiji physically. However,despite the great efforts made to date to contain the spread and effects of COVID-19 locally,global travel restrictions have compelled us to host this meeting virtually.  I am pleased tohighlight that there are no active COVID cases in Fiji and furthermore, no cases of localtransmission in over 180 days. I sincerely hope that it will not be long before you can all say thesame.Therefore, I welcome you all to today’s programme, which I hope will enhance each of yourcountries’ journeys in designing relevant Inclusive Green Finance policies and initiatives.  I wishto also extend a special welcome to our distinguished speakers who will be sharing with us theirinvaluable knowledge and experiences over the next three days.It is always an honour for the RBF to welcome AFI members to our programs; just as we did 4years ago when we hosted the GPF in Denarau, Nadi.  It was also at Denarau that the RBFmade commitments under the Maya Declaration to advance green finance.  More recently in2018, the Bank hosted the AFI family again in Nadi for a conference on Smart Policies for GreenFinancial Inclusion, which is where AFI launched its workstream on Inclusive Green Finance.Climate Change, Financial Inclusion and Inclusive Green FinanceThis joint learning programme neatly links two of the most pressing issues facing emerging anddeveloping countries, namely financial inclusion and climate change. Inclusive green finance,which is the central theme of the programme, presents a practical solution that can help addressthese challenges in a sustainable manner.Green finance and inclusive green finance are issues that are very close to our hearts in Fiji, aswe in the South Pacific are at the frontline in the war against climate change.  Year after year, weare faced with the threat of stronger and more severe natural disasters, rising sea levels and theresulting negative impacts including the displacement of our communities.According to the 2017 Climate Vulnerability Assessment Report for Fiji that was jointly compiledby the World Bank and the Fijian Government, climate change is expected to magnify theseverity and frequency of these disasters.  It estimates that  output that is lost every year due to 1 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
tropical cyclones and floods could increase by 50 percent to as much as 6.5 percent of GDP by2050.In the wake of COVID-19, new challenges and opportunities have obligated global leaders torethink and re-focus on how best to keep their economies, businesses and livelihoods afloat,while at the same time collaborating globally to share resources and strategies to cope withemerging as well as on-going concerns such as climate change risks.Similar to the current pandemic, the effects of climate change are far-reaching.  The resultingimpact on the most vulnerable and poorest segments of society become even more significantas they face more-than-double the usual risks of poverty when scarce resources become over-stretched.  While climate change deepens poverty, financial inclusion can build the resilience ofindividuals to sudden and extreme climate events.  Financial services designed specifically forthe unbanked and vulnerable populations can potentially increase the affordability of climate-friendly products and services as well as improve access to adaptation tools.For this reason, it is important that we work together to find workable, sustainable solutions thatwill allow us to live and grow responsibly while respecting our environment.  Thus, the concept ofbuilding better and stronger economies through sustainable/green finance can unlockopportunities for awareness & capacity building. Also, collaboration and leveraging tools thatfacilitate lending to green and socially inclusive projects can strengthen resilience.As central bankers and policy makers, the onus is on us to ensure that we lead this positivechange within the financial industry that we regulate and oversee.  Inclusive green finance is anew and evolving policy area, not only for Fiji, but amongst AFI member institutions, and the RBFis grateful to AFI and the AFI network for bringing this very relevant issue to the fore fordiscussion.Inclusive Green Finance and Gender Inclusive Finance Despite the overall progress in financial inclusion the world over, women are stilldisproportionately excluded from the formal financial system.  According to the last Global FindexReport in 2017, more than one billion women remain excluded globally, while the gender gap foraccessing financial services across developing economies remained at 9 percent since 2011. This raises an important consideration for inclusive green finance policy design as research hasshown that women and children are highly vulnerable during and after natural disasters due tochanges in social control mechanisms, gender roles and responsibilities.The Fijian Government and Reserve Bank of Fiji recognise the critical importance of genderequity and social inclusion to sustainable development, and this is reflected in our legislations,policies and development plans.  In this regard, I am pleased to note that important aspects onthe interplay between inclusive green finance and gender inclusive finance will be covered in thenext few days and should generate interesting discussions.  On a personal and related note, ithas always been my dream to institute a specialised, dedicated SME bank in the country whichwould enhance our focus in the sector and especially target the needs of our womenentrepreneurs.  We are currently exploring this option with local stakeholders and Governmentand hope to make headway in this space soon.Inclusive Green Finance Capacity Building and Policy MakingThe risks of climate change, whether physical, or transitional are complex to understand andassess.  For central banks and supervisors, and especially so for regulators in small islandnations like Fiji, understanding the issue of climate change involves the recognition of structuralchanges that will affect the financial system and the economy in general.  This will challenge uswhen conducting our fundamental missions of ensuring price stability, financial stability, orenhancing financial inclusion and necessitates the implementation of policies, regulations and 2 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
national strategies to mitigate or build climate change resilience.In this respect, it is essential that we strengthen not only our capacities in this field, but ourcooperation and knowledge sharing at the national, regional, and international levels.  I commendyou all for participating in this training as the lessons shared will allow us to take the crucial nextsteps in designing and implementing practical and forward-looking inclusive green policies thatwill help your countries withstand the impacts of climate change for generations to come.Fiji’s Journey on Inclusive Green FinanceIn Fiji, we have made considerable progress in the green finance area.  However, the impact ofCOVID-19 has somewhat dampened this momentum.  Fiji was the first country to ratify thehistoric Paris Agreement and we continue to take actions to address both the drivers andimpacts of climate change and natural disaster events.  Both the Fijian Government and the RBFrecognise that environmental damages and climate-related risks pose immediate threats to Fiji’seconomic and financial stability, and as a result, our concerted efforts place a keen focus onbuilding a greener, sustainable nation and transitioning Fiji to a net zero emission economy by2050.The Reserve Bank, with the support of the financial industry, is committed towards greening Fiji’sfinancial sector and has introduced a number of supporting initiatives in this regard.  Noteworthyhighlights include working with Government to issue the country’s first sovereign Green Bond –making Fiji the first emerging market economy to do so globally; in addition to makinginternational green finance commitments under the AFI Maya Declaration and joining theSustainable Banking Network.  On the domestic front, the Reserve Bank provides concessionalfunding for sustainable and renewable energy projects and has in place a renewable energyloans ratio for commercial bank.To build socio-economic resilience, Fiji has articulated strategic priorities and actions through anumber of our national development plans and policies.  More recently, work on a establishing aClimate Change Bill will allow us to introduce a progressive legal framework that is designed tofundamentally shape and enable climate resilient development pathways for the benefit of Fiji’speople, without jeopardizing our progress as a nation or our environment.At the Reserve Bank, our inclusive green finance emphasis centres on implementing initiativesthat not only align to national priorities and international standards, but also constantly evolve tomeet the changing needs of Fiji’s financial industry, in line with global market developments. Work has commenced on drafting a national sustainable finance framework and discussionswith Government are underway to issue Fiji’s first Blue Bonds to fund the conservation of ourocean and marine resources.The lessons, challenges and opportunities from Fiji’s journey on inclusive green finance thereforeform the basis of this joint learning programme and we look forward to sharing these highlightswith you over the next few days.ConclusionDear colleagues, I must conclude by thanking AFI for the opportunity to co-host this event.  Wegreatly appreciate your presence and commitment to this three-day programme.  We have veryrelevant topics to consider, which I hope will generate interesting and productive discussions aswell as identify the way forward for your respective institutions.I wish you all a very successful training and an enjoyable virtual learning experience. 3 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
Ariff Ali: Updates on Fiji’s economy and monetary policy objectivesAddress by Mr Ariff Ali, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the Ground breaking Ceremonyfor BSP Life’s Voivoi Warehouse Development, Suva, 30 October 2020.*   *   *SalutationsMr Michael Nacola; Managing Director, BSP Life LimitedThe BSP Life Board,Management and Staff;Invited Guests;Ladies and Gentlemen.Opening RemarksBula vinaka and a good morning to you all.Thank you very much for the invitation to officiate at this ground breaking ceremony for BSPLife’s Voivoi Warehouse Development. For those who know me well, you would know of mypreference to sit amongst you as a guest rather than officiate as Chief Guest.I however accepted the invitation as it gives me an opportunity to provide an update on oureconomy in line with the significance of the timing of this occasion, as well as convey my sincereappreciation to the board of BSP Life, Michael and your Team, for making this bold businessdecision to invest in the current environment. I wish to applaud your confidence in Fiji and Isincerely hope this will encourage others who are currently adopting a “wait and see approach”to invest sooner rather than later. This investment is a reminder to all of us of the important rolethat the private sector plays in contributing towards Fiji’s economic development, while meetingthe needs of our communities.It is indeed out of the ordinary to witness an event such as this take place in the midst of thecurrent pandemic. However, I am not so surprised that an institution like BSP Life is bringing ustogether today, for exactly that – to be extraordinary during what is now being referred to as thenew normal. BSP Life has become a household name and over the years has built a strong trackrecord, reputation and brand amongst our people. Their tagline of “With you for life” is in my view,very fitting, as they have continued to demonstrate their commitment to serving the Fijian peoplefor life.Today’s ceremony marks an important milestone in BSP Life’s career as this new developmentwill support business in Nadi by catering to the growing demand for office space and contributetowards stimulating economic activity, which is particularly important in the current climate.Ladies and Gentleman, as you are all aware the world is sailing in uncharted waters, and theseas are rough. The Coronavirus has inflicted severe damage on the human, social andeconomic fronts. There are currently over 43 million active cases worldwide and around 1.2million deaths across the globe.Despite hitting our economy hard, I am pleased to highlight that Fiji has had no COVIDcommunity transmissions for almost 200 days now. Furthermore, while some countries are re-imposing lockdown measures in response to the second wave of the virus, here in Fiji we areblessed and privileged to be able to gather for functions like this, attend soccer and rugbymatches in person with other fans as well as meet for religious functions. Let us not take this forgranted and we appreciate the good work done by our agencies. 1 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
Economic UpdatesThe IMF estimates the economic impact of the coronavirus to reach US$28 trillion by 2025.Unemployment has spiked in all countries and the global economy is projected to contract by 4.4percent in 2020, with 90 million people falling back into extreme poverty. This is a crisis like noother and the outturn is expected to be worse than the Global Depression of the 1930s.Unfortunately, the Fijian economy has not been spared from the wrath of the pandemic. Withinternational borders closed, Tourism, the mainstay of our economy, has come to a standstill.Given that tourism cuts across many sectors and accounts for 30–40 percent of Fiji’s GrossDomestic Product, the Fijian economy is forecast to contract by 21.7 percent this year – ourlargest contraction since the 6.3 percent decline in 1987.We are currently reviewing our economic forecasts and it is encouraging to note someimprovements in domestic economic activity since the onset of COVID-related restrictions in thefirst quarter. Mobility and consumption indicators have picked up in line with the easing of therestrictions domestically while cane, timber and some manufacturing outputs have recoveredsomewhat from their lows recorded in the first half of the year. In this regard, I am pleased tohighlight that positive developments in the partial indicators that we monitor point towards asoftening of the contraction that was projected earlier. Our official forecast will be released laternext month.Monetary Policy ObjectivesDespite losing close to a billion dollars in tourism related foreign exchange income over the past6 months, our foreign reserves remain at comfortable levels of just above $2.2 billion andsufficient to cover 8.2 months of retained imports. Rumours of a devaluation were rife on socialmedia sometime back, and there are some who continue to speculate with the aim of harmingbusiness confidence. Just as I said 18 months ago, I assure you that there will be no devaluationas our foreign reserves position will be stable over the medium term.On inflation, I am pleased to highlight that price pressures are currently subdued with inflationaveraging –2.4 percent in the first nine months of this year. We expect inflation to remain in thenegative territory into mid-2021.The Reserve Bank has maintained a system flush with liquidity to create an accommodativefinancial environment conducive to investment and supportive of recovery. Liquidity in the bankingsystem surpassed the $1 billion mark for the first time ever in August and has since hoveredabove $900 million placing downward pressure on interest rates and banks’ cost of funds. TheRBF will ensure that liquidity remains ample and we stand ready to inject more should the needarise.The outlook for the Reserve Bank’s twin monetary objectives of low inflation and adequate foreignreserves remains intact, although the extended border closure poses a key downside risk fordomestic economic recovery going forward. Our financial system is sound, well capitalised andprofitable coming into this crisis and we are in a reasonably good position to cushion any relatedshocks.Supporting Economic GrowthIn light of the ongoing global travel restrictions, we continue to strategise and plan for steering theeconomy forward as we await news of progress on vaccines and other solutions. During thesetimes, we are encouraged by investors like BSP Life who are not holding back on their plans andcontinue to display the confidence required for our economy to quickly recover. This is a timewhen Fiji needs good investments to assure of our sustainability and economic viability goingforward. In our Industry Visit to the West last week, it was reassuring to note the plans for over 2 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
$0.5 billion in investments earmarked for the Nadi/Lautoka corridor. For large investors withsufficient cash flow, it makes sense to invest now, as the economic slack and ample systemliquidity have placed downward pressure on construction, labour and interest costs. Additionally,the recent incentives introduced by Government in the 2020–21 National Budget such as thereduction in taxes and elimination of stamp duties are an important catalyst for the private sectorto press on with their plans for expansion.BSP Life’s recent investments such as the refurbishment of Sofitel ($46m), the Voivoicommercial development acquisition ($33m) and the current facility construction shows theircommitment to progress and confidence in the economy. In total, the company has invested over$128 million in various ventures to sustain its growth over the medium to long term.Ladies and Gentlemen, in addition to these investments, BSP life has invested a significantamount in private equity in the last 5 years. Their pool of fixed-income investments which includeinvestments in Governments Infrastructure Bonds means they are investing in Fiji’s future. BSPLife also provides security and savings for our people and over the past 5 years, they have paidout close to $300 million in maturing life policies, claims and bonuses. Adding up theseachievements shows that BSP Life is not only a leading corporate entity, but one that hascontributed to and continues to support the growth of the nation.I understand that the Chief Investment Officer will provide us with more details of this currentdevelopment so I will not divulge any further details.ConclusionI wish to conclude by once again thanking the BSP Life team for inviting me to today’s ceremonyand I congratulate the Board, Management and Staff on this notable achievement.Vinaka Vakalevu. 3 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
Page 1 of 9    An opening address by Rashad Cassim, a Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the World Fintech Festival   8 December 2020  Challenges facing fintechs and opportunities to respond   Good day to our South African financial technology (fintech) community and to all our fintech colleagues connecting to the World Fintech Festival in South Africa.   The Intergovernmental Fintech Working Group (IFWG) is honoured to be part of this year’s Singapore Fintech Festival. We would like to commend the Monetary Authority of Singapore for organising a virtual festival which is testament to the immense possibilities that are unlocked when we embrace technology in the way we work and interact. My understanding is that we are likely over 100 000 people connected to this event.  Before we begin today’s programme, I would like to talk, very briefly, about the significance of fintech, particularly in the context of COVID-191, and reflect on some of the challenges that fintech continues to face. For fintech to continue making inroads into financial services, it may be important for the ecosystem to overcome some of these challenges. Many of these reflections will be explored further by esteemed expert speakers in the panel discussions.      I realise that any discussion of fintech raises a dilemma for many of us, given that it  is a complex and multifaceted subject involving topics as diverse as, among others, regulatory barriers, the nature and use of technology, and its social and economic impact, be it economic efficiency or financial inclusion. COVID-19 has also opened up a whole new set of issues and challenges for fintech firms.                          1 coronavirus disease 2019 
Page 2 of 9   While I would like to focus my talk specifically on four challenges facing the fintech industry – drawing, in part, from the South African experience – let me say a few things about what COVID-19 means for fintech firms.   Although the pandemic has placed significant stress on all businesses, including fintech firms, many of them, specifically those with established consumer bases, have managed to pivot. There are growing examples of fintech firms helping small, micro and medium enterprises (SMMEs) in ‘going online and digital’.   The ‘going online and digital’ phenomenon is propelled by the pandemic. This is not only as a result of waning demand during periods of lockdown, but also because of shifting consumer behaviour. Heightened consciousness of social distancing and avoidance of physical interaction has thrust fintech further into action, with more people adopting digital financial services. South Africa is no exception, with nearly 80% of surveyed South Africans reporting that they used contactless payment methods as a perceived safer way to pay since the COVID-19 outbreak.2    To meet the increased demand for digital payments, there has been a resurgence of innovation in digital payment products and channels, including cheaper and more convenient point-of-sale (POS) devices for small businesses as well as the strengthening of apps and platforms that enable consumers and businesses to make payments.3, 4, 5 In addition to digitising payment at POS, merchants are also adopting online sales (or e-commerce), which provides more safety and convenience to customers while also expanding customer reach. In South Africa, for example, one of the largest payment gateways has reported a surge in online payments, recording a                        2 MasterCard, April 2020, Global Consumer Study, available at https://newsroom.mastercard.com/mea/press-releases/mastercard-study-shows-south-african-consumers-make-the-move-to-contactless-payments-for-everyday-purchases-seeking-touch-free-payment-experiences/.  3 Tom Jackson, 14 September 2020, ‘SA fintech start-up Ozow launches new payments platforms, zero-rates data costs’, available at https://disrupt-africa.com/2020/09/sa-fintech-startup-ozow-launches-new-payments-platforms-zero-rates-data-costs/.  4 Staff Reporter, 29 October 2020, ‘Yoco launches new stand-alone card machine for small businesses’, available at https://www.iol.co.za/business-report/companies/yoco-launches-new-stand-alone-card-machine-for-small-businesses-f59ed3e8-c60f-4333-908f-5254bae139e9.  5 Ishani Chetty, 29 September, ‘New payment tool launches for local SMEs’, available at https://ventureburn.com/2020/09/new-payment-tool-launches-for-local-smes/.  
Page 3 of 9  year-on-year increase of almost 90% in total new business account registrations since the lockdown began.6  Possible structural challenges facing fintechs  Allow me to turn our attention to possibly more structural challenges facing fintech firms today.   I have distilled these challenges to the primary challenge of access, and have tagged it as challenges around four R’s, namely: i. access to regulators; ii. access to rule-making;  iii. access to resources; and  iv. access to refined financial services data.    Access to regulators  Incumbent firms in financial services have a long history with regulators. By virtue of being regulated, and often highly regulated, incumbents have access to regulators. For these incumbents, when new products or services are conceived, it is often mandatory to ensure engagement with regulators to gain approval for new innovations. This is to assess fit with regulations and compliance frameworks. This required engagement has strengthened further after the 2008 global financial crisis, and especially as technology reshapes how financial services are delivered. New cloud propositions, robo-advice services and even the application of artificial intelligence (AI) often warrant deeper engagements with regulators.   In contrast to incumbents, fintech firms may operate on the regulatory periphery. They often create services different from existing platforms. Cases in point are crypto-assets, initial coin offerings, and Internet finance such as peer-to-peer lending and crowd-funding platforms. Fintechs tend to focus on services close to the front-end and the consumer interface. They are, again, likely to be on the outer periphery of highly                        6 PayFast, 27 April 2020, ‘PayFast sees spike in new business registrations spurred by COVID-19 lockdown’, available at https://www.payfast.co.za/blog/payfast-sees-spike-in-new-business-registrations-spurred-by-covid-19-lockdown/.   
Page 4 of 9  regulated value chains such as payment systems. Unlike the core players in clearing and settlement that are highly regulated, fintechs may have ‘light touch’ or no regulations applied to them.    Based on this, our experience is that fintech firms may often not be in the direct regulatory purview of authorities, and may therefore have less formalised and less frequent meetings with regulators.   The first possible structural challenge, then, is access to regulators.   This is an important challenge to resolve.   Our laws and regulations have historically been crafted for financial services intermediaries, long in the domain. The legal and compliance frameworks may be hard to interpret for fintech firms who may be tech-savvy start-ups with limited compliance know-how or competencies.   Access to regulators, and know-how of which authorities to connect with for particular types of queries, is important. Our regulatory architecture can be complex, with multiple financial services authorities, ranging from prudential and conduct-focused, through credit-related, to financial intelligence-related regulators. Access to this network is important in order to reduce any potential barriers to entry from a legal, regulatory and compliance perspective. This is why we have seen a rapid emergence of innovation centres, hubs and guidance units across the globe: in recognition of the importance of increasing access to regulators, by fintech firms in particular.    Access to rule-making   Rule-making in financial services can be complex. The ‘rules of the game’ can be embedded in legislation and regulations, and through related instruments such as directives, position papers and standards.   A good example of this complexity can be seen in the regulation of payment systems. Often, primary regulations set the conditions or criteria based on which stakeholders 
Page 5 of 9  can have access to clearing and settlement systems. Such primary regulations position the overarching principles and objectives of providing legal certainty, deepening financial inclusion, and ensuring the general safety and efficiency of payment systems.   However, at a ‘lower level’, rules related to how payment schemes operate are equally important in setting specific conditions or criteria related to a payment system. As an example: direct credit systems will define clearing time-frames, and debit systems will define charge-back rules or conditions. These types of rules are often called the ‘rule books’ in jurisdictions like Canada and the United Kingdom (UK). There are ‘rule books’ publically available for schemes such as the Single European Payments Area (SEPA) Credits in Europe or, in the UK, the Faster Payments Scheme.   In South Africa, we have found that, due to legacy reasons, some of the rule-making processes, especially in the payment system space, have traditionally been the domain of incumbents. Based on some of the cases reviewed, our sense is that broader input into the rule-making processes by those impacted across the value chain would benefit from obtaining a variety of competing perspectives. The voice of fintech firms in this process is important. This kind of ever-increasing access to influence rule-making is vital to ensuring that the best policy and regulatory stances are adopted.   Even more importantly, the ‘rules of the game’ must not create barriers to growth for fintechs. We have identified a few scenarios where this may be the case. Authorities have to ensure that the approach to, and governance of such processes, is transparent and robust.   Access to resources  Two significant resource challenges facing fintechs are access to capital and access to skills sets.   Unlike incumbents who generally have reasonable access to finance, fintech firms and specifically fintech SMMEs may experience significant additional challenges accessing finance. While consumer credit is likely well-served in South Africa, SMMEs 
Page 6 of 9  continue to struggle to access critical funding to sustain themselves and even grow. This is despite the significant contribution that these businesses make to gross domestic product (GDP) and employment.   The inability of SMMEs to raise funds is caused by a number of demand- and supply-side factors, such as the lack of financial records and the inability of lenders to tailor their loan terms to match the business needs. According to a 2019 report by one of the large banks in South Africa, few fintechs manage to secure start-up capital, with the general sentiment indicating that funding seems to be readily, but not openly, available. More broadly speaking, SMMEs also operate in a mostly informal, invisible and cash-based economy. Addressing this challenge is related to the broader need to digitise these businesses and ensure that they are included in the digital economy.    Turning our attention to the importance of access to skills: although much emphasis is placed on the technologies in the fintech domain, it is the people, the skills and the talent that create the innovation and propel the change. This is evidenced across the fintech value chain: from the data scientists who unearth customer behaviour patterns, needs and ‘pain points’, through the software developers and engineers who develop the solutions, to the business heads who craft growth strategies based on an emerging technology.  However, similarly to most countries, particularly developing countries, South Africa has a shortage of technical skills. The 2019 South African Information, Technology and Communication (ICT)7 Skills Survey found that the Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR) has not had a significant impact on the South African ICT skills landscape yet. According to the report, the skills associated with the current set of emerging technologies – such as AI, the Internet of Things, blockchain, automation, data science and programming – were the scarcest.8 This leads to a race for talented and skilled individuals such as data scientists, programmers, software developers and design thinkers. The challenge, of course, is not specific to fintech firms; it also affects us as regulators. However, based on our discussions with fintech firms, the race for acquiring such skills sets is pronounced for fintechs, especially if they are still in their                        7 Information and Communication Technology 8 Johannesburg Centre for Software Engineering (JCSE) (Wits University) and the Institute of Information Technology Professionals South Africa (IITPSA), 2019, South African ICT Skills Survey 
Page 7 of 9  early phases of development and/or maturity. It is less so for big-tech firms with well-established markets.    Access to refined financial services data  Finally, we turn to the importance of data, specifically refined and granular data.   It has become cliché to say that ‘data is the new oil of the economy’. As the digital economy continues to be embedded through the use of mobile devices, the use of social media platforms, and generally increasing activities over the Internet and online commercial platforms, we will increasingly create and leave behind ‘digital bread crumbs’ of unprecedented volumes. Never before have we seen such volumes of data. And for the first time in human history, we also now have evolving tools and techniques at our disposal through cloud-computing, AI and machine-learning methods to handle such volumes of data.   However, in this new digital economy, the availability of, and access to, data related to, for example, transactional payments or specific customer behaviour, has become a key competitive driver. Access to both structured and especially unstructured data can provide significant competitive advantages to those who own it. Fintechs in particular are exploring the use of Big Data to produce new services such as product comparisons and tailored solutions based on consumer-specific data. While Big Data presents new opportunities, the scope of available data, and how to govern access to that data, poses new challenges for the financial services industry and regulatory authorities around the world.    As a result of the above, access to refined data is a key issue that regulatory authorities have to deal with. Examples of addressing it through Open Banking and Open Finance efforts are increasing in many jurisdictions.   For South Africa, it is important to land on the policy imperatives for such efforts. There are a number of open questions for authorities. These include (but are not limited to):    Should incumbents be required to share their data with fintechs?  
Page 8 of 9    Should the standards for sharing data be developed by the regulators or by the market?    How is customer data protection being ensured, and what commercial arrangements might arise from owning that data?    When dealing with such large data sets, what measures are in place to detect, respond to and recover from cyberattacks?  Addressing these and other open questions is important in moving the fintech dial forward.   In South Africa, numerous fintech firms applied for our Regulatory Sandbox process to trial new Open Banking models. To make progress within this space, we require incumbents and fintech firms to work together to shape our policy thinking and policy stances. Any unaddressed solutions will possibly continue to see fintech firms using methods that may pose an increased operational risk. The solutions of open Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) are therefore pressing. The industry should actively engage with fintech firms on this long-standing matter. We also need to learn from jurisdictions that have already traversed this path, and modestly take from their emerging lessons.   Conclusion  Allow me to conclude.   The South African regulators recognise the role they can play in addressing these access challenges. The IFWG aims to demystify the regulatory landscape, provide space for safe experimentation, and actively advance innovation. We do this through the Innovation Hub, launched earlier this year, and its three facilitators: the Regulatory Guidance Unit, the Regulatory Sandbox and the Innovation Accelerator.  
Page 9 of 9  Since launching the Innovation Hub, we have received nearly 100 queries in the Regulatory Guidance Unit and over 50 applications to the Regulatory Sandbox. These numbers show just how vibrant and dynamic the South African fintech ecosystem is. Most importantly, though, they are a positive sign of increasing access to regulators and rule-making for fintechs, which enables us to hear more of those divergent and new voices.  In addition, the Innovation Accelerator is a space for us to drive both internally oriented and market-facing innovation initiatives. We focus particularly on those initiatives that address the challenges faced, and have the potential to deliver benefits across the regulatory and broader financial services landscape. We currently have eight initiatives under the Accelerator, looking at important topics such as digital platforms, crypto-assets, financial markets innovation, Open Banking, non-traditional data and big tech in fintech. What makes this unique is that regulators are journeying along to co-create an understanding of the major issues facing fintechs, including co-developing policy stances.   The fintech phenomenon is here to stay, and will continue to grow. In the end, however, it is not about fintech but about creating vehicles to support innovation in the economy and the financial sector. It turns out that fintech firms just happen to be the key agent through which we are moving towards a more dynamic financial sector.   I trust you will enjoy the deliberations today, and would like to end by congratulating the IFWG and the Monetary Authority of Singapore for arranging this event.  Thank you. 
1BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020
2BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020
3BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020
4BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020Global Economic Performance and Prospects: Recovery Underway, Financial Market Uncertainty EasesNational Economic Performance and Prospects: Recovery Process Underway, Stability MaintainedBank Indonesia Policy Mix 2020: Strengthening Stability, Supporting National Economic Recovery • Rupiah Exchange Rate Stabilization Policy• Monetary Policy Stimulus• Monetary Policy Mix and Macroprudential Policy• Implementation of Law No. 2 of 2020: Supporting State    Finances and Financial System Stability • Digitalization of Payment Systems: Accelerating National    Digital Economic and Financial Integration • Money Market Deepening: Effectiveness of Policy     Transmission and Financing • Empowerment of Sharia Economy and Finance, and MSMEs• Strengthening International Policy• Transformation of Bank IndonesiaSynergize to Build Optimism for Economic Recovery:One Prerequisite, Five Principal StrategiesBank Indonesia Policy Mix for 2021: Supporting Optimism for National Economic Recovery• Monetary Policy Direction• Macroprudential Policy Direction• Payment System Policy Direction• Acceleration of Money Market Deepening• MSMEs Policy and Sharia Economy and Finance • International Policy Moving Forward with Optimism TABLE OF CONTENT71220212223252730323638414546474849535354
BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020His Excellency,• The President of the Republic of Indonesia, Joko Widodo. Honourable Guests, • Leaders and Members of the House of Representatives and House of Regional Representatives of the Republic of Indonesia;• Leaders of State Institutions; • Ministers of Indonesia Onward Cabinet (Kabinet Indonesia Maju),• Chairman and Members of the Board of the Financial Services Authority (OJK) and Deposit Insurance Corporations (LPS)• Former Governors and Board members of Bank Indonesia;• Provincial Governors from all across Indonesia;• Leaders of the Banking Industry, Corporate Sector and National Media;• Awardees of 2020 Bank Indonesia Award;• Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen,Speech of the Governor of Bank IndonesiaBANK INDONESIA’S ANNUAL MEETING Jakarta, 3 December 2020SYNERGIZETO BUILD OPTIMISM FORECONOMIC RECOVERY
6BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020Assalamualaikum Warahmatullahi Wabarakatuh,Greetings to everyone, Shalom,Om Swastyastu, Namo Buddhaya,Salam Kebajikan. First of all, let us express our gratitude to the Almighty God, because only with His grace and blessings today we could gather at this Bank Indonesia Annual Meeting of 2020. With all humility, we would like to extend our gratitude Mr. President who has been pleased to attend this convocation along with all the invited guests.We congratulate the banks, corporations, and individuals who received the Bank Indonesia Awards 2020. A total of 41 awards in 4 areas and 13 categories in the fields of monetary stability and financial system management, payment systems and Rupiah money management, MSMEs development and sharia economy and finance, as well as Bank Indonesia policies’ supports. This award is held annually, together with the Annual Meeting of Bank Indonesia, as an appreciation and recognition to partners who have supported the implementation of Bank Indonesia’s tasks.On this auspicious occasion, allow us to present an evaluation of economic performance in 2020 as well as the economic prospects and the policy direction of Bank Indonesia for 2021, which we summarize under the theme “Synergize to Build Optimism for Economic Recovery”. In our opinion, this theme is appropriate to strengthen the momentum for the national economic recovery process. After struggling to cope with the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, thanks be to God the Indonesian economy has shown strong resilience. The worst is over. Stability has been maintained and the process of economic recovery is ongoing. The synergy of national economic policies is very close, and it is this synergy that we need to continue to strengthen in the future to build optimism for the national economic recovery. Bank Indonesia has, and will always, synergize with the Central and Regional Government, the Financial System Stability Committee (Komite Stabilitas Sistem Keuangan - KSSK), the House of Representatives (Dewan Perwakilan Rakyat - DPR), the banking sector, the bussinesses, and all parties to jointly build this optimism. God willing, the national economy will get better and continue to improve towards an Advanced Indonesia in 2045. We present the presentation in 5 (five) sections, namely: (i) Global economic performance and prospects that indicate recovery, financial market uncertainty has eased; (ii) National economic performance and prospects that demonstrate resilience in the recovery process; (iii) Bank Indonesia policy mix for 2020; (iv) Synergy of national economic policies to build optimism for future economic recovery; and (v) The direction of the Bank Indonesia policy mix for 2021. Our presentation is at the same time a manifestation of Bank Indonesia’s accountability and transparency as mandated in the Bank Indonesia Act.
7BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020Global Economic Performance and Prospects: Recovery Underway, Financial Market Uncertainty EasesThe COVID-19 pandemic had an extraordinary impact on humanity, economy and finance worldwide. The scale and speed of the spread of the pandemic around the world to 138 countries has far exceeded previous pandemics (SARS and MERS). This has had an unprecedented impact on health and humanity with more than 60 million people testing positive and 1.4 million died from COVID-19. The impact on human mobility and world economic and financial activities has been unparalleled. The COVID-19 pandemic has caused a worldwide economic recession and in many countries, financial market panic and uncertainty, as well as many people falling into poverty. Because of the complexity of the problems, it requires an extraordinary policy response in terms of health, fiscal stimulus, monetary stimulus, and also in the financial sector. The crisis conditions we face from the COVID-19 pandemic are very different from previous crises, whether the depression in the 1930s, the debt crisis in Latin America in the 1980s, the Asian crisis in 1997/98, or the global financial crisis in 2008/2009. The epicenter of the crisis this time is the COVID-19 pandemic, attacking human mobility, and therefore economic mobility, resulting in an economic recession affecting the monetary and financial sectors.The COVID-19 pandemic has an impact on health and humanitarian problems around the world. COVID-19, which first appeared in Wuhan, China, has spread rapidly throughout the world (Graph 1). Until now, more than 60 million people have tested positive for COVID-19, mostly in the United States (US), India, Brazil, and Russia. COVID-19 has also claimed more than 1.4 million lives (Graph 2). After reaching its peak in the second quarter of 2020, additional cases and mortality rates began to slightly subside. However, the risk of a COVID-19 second or even third wave pandemic is the focus of attention in various countries. Meanwhile, vaccine development is continuing with a number of successful trials and ready to be administered in stages estarting in December 2020. It is likely that vaccinations can be carried out more widely in 2021, including in Indonesia. The speed and progress in handling the COVID-19 pandemic determines the process of economic recovery. To mitigate the health impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, governments in many countries have implemented the 3 Ts, namely: Trace, Testing  and Treatment; while the community carries out the 3 Ms: Memakai Masker (Wearing a Mask), Menjaga Jarak (Keeping a Distance), and Mencuci Tangan (Hand Washing). Application varies from country to country, for example, there are very stringent restrictions Africa8,220Asia62,898MENA35,196America235,279Europe279,151Global620,744Additional Cases as of Nov 22ndPerson100,0000200,000300,000400,000500,000600,000700,000800,000AfricaAsiaMENAAmericaEuropeGlobal345672020891011Graph 1. Additional Global COVID-19 CasesSource: WHO, compiled02004006008001,0001,2001,4001,600-2.000.002.004.006.008.0010.00GlobalAmericaEuropeAsiaThe Number of Global Death(%)Thousand345672020891011Graph 2. Global COVID-19 Fatality RateSource: WHO, compiledData as of 20 November 2020Data as of 20 November 2020
8BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020on mobility (lockdown) in China, strict in Europe and relatively more relaxed in the US (Graphs 3a and 3b). These policies have limited economic activity, particularly in the second quarter of 2020. Retail sales have decreased, impacting declining consumption, production and investment (Graph 4a and 4b). The volume of international trade has also decreased due to the disruption of global supply chains that have been dominated by China. Economic activity has gradually improved from the third quarter of 2020, along with the increase in human mobility, although it still needs time to recover to the conditions before COVID-19.Global economic performance has begun to show improvement, and will increase even further in 2021. After the contraction in the second quarter of 2020, world economic activity began to increase, although it is still overshadowed by the risk of a COVID-19 second wave. Economic improvements differ from country to country, depending on the size of fiscal and monetary stimuli, as well as the successful handling of COVID-19 and increased human mobility. The Chinese economy began to record positive growth in the third quarter of 2020 and is estimated to be the first country to begin to recover in the fourth -20020406080100USGermanyFranceItalyUKSpainJapanIndex7 Days Moving Average12345620207891011Graph 3a. Limited Mobility of Developed CountriesSource: Goldman Sachs Research, GS Effective Lockdown Index, compiledUSGermanyFranceItalyUKAustraliaCanadaSingaporeNew ZealandAverage AEJapan86.96204060801001201220192020123456789Index 100 = IndexQ42019Graph 4a. Retail Sales AESource: CEIC, compiled-20020406080100Index7 Days Moving AverageHongkongChinaIndiaIndonesiaBrazilRussia12345620207891011Graph 3b. Mobility Restrictions on EMEsData as of 20 November 2020ChinaIndonesiaPhilippinesThailandMalaysiaRussiaTurkeyBrazilMexicoAverage EM88.325060708090100Index 100 =IndexQ4 20191220192020123456789Graph 4b. Retail Sales EMEsSource: CEIC, compiledData as of 20 November 2020Source: Goldman Sachs Research, GS Effective Lockdown Index, compiled
9BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020quarter of 2020 (Table 1). Economic improvements were also recorded in the United States (US), although accompanied by the highest cases of COVID-19. Meanwhile, economic recovery was more limited in Europe, India and Latin America. The global economic recovery could be seen in the improvement of several early indicators in October 2020, such as global community mobility, the Manufacturing and Services Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) in several countries, and consumer confidence in the US and Europe. World trade volume and commodity prices have also increased. Going forward, the global economic recovery is predicted to continue with a growth of 5.0% in 2021, after contracting by 3.8% in 2020.On global financial markets, uncertainty has eased, although caution is warranted. The rapid spread of the COVID-19 pandemic around the world caused a global financial market panic in March 2020, resulting in the Volatility Index (VIX) and Credit Default Swap (CDS) risk indexes for Indonesia soaring to 83 and 272 from previously 19 and 66 respectively (Graph 5). The wave of portfolio investment withdrawals from developing countries (Emerging Market Economies - EMEs) occurred in large numbers and within a very short time period, resulting in the scarcity of the US dollar that put major depreciation pressures on the EME’s currency exchange rate (Graph 6). With the handling of COVID-19 and the response with fiscal and monetary stimulus policies in many countries, global financial market uncertainty has begun to subside and the flow of portfolio investment has begun to return to EMEs. Since early November 2020, global uncertainty has been decreasing after the results of the US Presidential election, although volatility 201820192020*2021*Global Economic Growth3.62.8-3.85.0   Advanced Economies2.21.6-4.94.0      US2.92.2-3.84.3      Euro Area1.91.3-7.25.0      Japan0.30.7-5.72.5   Emerging Economies4.53.7-2.95.6      China6.76.12.17.8      India6.14.2-8.88.2      South America1.10.0-7.53.1World Trade Volume3.8-0.4-6.34.4Indonesian Export Commodity Price Index-2.8-3.0-5.84.0Table 1: Global Economy: Growth, Trade Volume, Commodity Prices (%, yoy)Source: World Economic Outlook Database October 2020, Bank Indonesia ProjectionDescription: * projection662727819832401020304050607080900501001502002503002345620207891011CDS IndonesiaVIX Index (rhs)ptsIndexGraph 5. Risk Indicators for Global and Indonesian   Financial MarketsData as of 20 November 2020Source: Bloomberg, compiled
10BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020needs to be watched out for amid concerns over a second wave of the COVID-19 pandemic. The VIX indicator decreased to 24 while the CDS also fell to 78 which then encouraged the strengthening of many Asian currencies against the US dollar. The reduction in global uncertainty is expected to stimulate foreign capital inflows and further appreciation of the exchange rates in developing countries, including Indonesia.A large fiscal stimulus was provided by many countries for economic recovery from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Fiscal stimulus were generally allocated for health budgets, social assistance programs for the community, incentives for the business world, especially for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs), and tax relief for corporations. Meanwhile, tax revenues dropped dramatically due to the economic recession. The sheer amount of additional spending amid falling tax revenues has led to a widening of the fiscal deficit in many countries, with a large increase in deficit exceeding 8% of GDP in developed countries compared to deficits in EMEs, which are generally lower due to the limited financing required (Graph 7). The size of the fiscal stimulus has had a positive impact on encouraging economic recovery since the third quarter of 2020 and is expected to accelerate future economic recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic. The widening output gap in the 2020-2021 period is expected to narrow in 2022-2023 as economies in many countries recover (Graph 8). The process of economic recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic was also supported by monetary stimulus from central banks in many countries. In developed countries, with monetary policy interest rates approaching zero percent, central banks have taken monetary stimulus by injecting liquidity (Quantitative Easing - QE) into the financial sector, particularly banking. This has been done by, among others, through an asset purchase program from the market, including government bonds, private bonds, and credit securities. As a percentage of GDP, the largest amount of QE was carried out by the European Central Bank (ECB) then by the Bank of Japan (BoJ), -4.2-3.4-3.1-4.2-3.2-6-1.9-9.8-2.4-2.3-1.6-5.2-13.3-9.8-8.4-12.8-8.7-11.7-8.4-10.1-16-12-8-40% ofGDPEmerging MarketAdvanced EconomiesINDMEXMASPHPTHARUSIDNHKTWNVIETCHNKORSINGERJPNUSSPAUKFRAITAGraph 7. Increase in Fiscal Deficit in the WorldData as of 20 November 2020Ave, 2020-2021Ave, 2022-2023-9-8-7-6-5-4-3-2-10(%)ESPITAFRAGBRAUSDEUJPNCANUSAINDZAFMEXBRAIDNTURCHNPOLPOLGraph 8. Forecast for Output Gap, 2020-2023Source: IMF WEO October 2020 100 101 102 103 104 105 106 107 108 109 90 92 94 96 98 100 102 1048792018201920201011121234567891011121234567891011Dollar IndexAsia Dollar index (rhs) - Reverse OrderIndexIndexDollar appreciationvs Major Currencies Dollar appreciationvs Asia Currencies Graph 6. USD vs World Exchange RatesSource: Bloomberg, compiledData as of 20 November 2020Source: OECD, MoF, Bloomberg
11BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020Bank of England (BoE) and The US Federal Reserve (Graph 9). In EMEs, monetary stimulus is implemented through a combination of lowering policy interest rates and injecting liquidity into banking and financial markets. The magnitude of the reduction in interest rates is in line with lower inflation and the need to maintain exchange rate stability. Meanwhile, liquidity injection (QE) is generally carried out through monetary operations, given the limited financial assets on the secondary market. In percentage of GDP, the largest amount of QE was carried out by Bank Indonesia followed by Mexico, Chile, and the Philippines (Graph 10).A number of international policy coordination steps were taken to support the global economic recovery. A number of important agendas surfaced in the G20, IMF, FSB and BIS forums. One of them was the need to continue fiscal and monetary stimulus in accordance with economic conditions and the handling of the COVID-19 pandemic in each country. This is because the COVID-19 pandemic will continue in 2021, even though vaccinations have been carried out. Other agendas relate to anticipatory measures for the impact of the decline in economic activity on corporate conditions, including credit and business restructuring programs, fiscal incentives, and the possibility of bankruptcy. Discussion of policies included efforts to maintain financial system stability from the impact of declining corporate performance, including how to overcome very low credit growth (credit crunch), the risk of increasing non-performing loans (loan at risk), a large excess of liquidity in financial markets (liquidity trap), and to anticipate the risk of excessive price bubbles for financial assets. Meanwhile, for developing countries, the main issues discussed were the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on increasing poverty and unemployment, declining ability to pay and the need for restructuring of foreign debt as well as mobilization of social assistance from donor countries. The COVID-19 pandemic has also exposed a number of weaknesses in the world’s trade, monetary and financial system arrangement. In the field of international trade, in the short term the COVID-19 pandemic encouraged countries to prioritize domestic interests (inward looking policy), both by increasing domestic sources of growth and limiting trade relations with other countries. The weakness of the international trade system, which has so far relied on China in the global supply chains, creates vulnerabilities (Scheme 1). This needs to be addressed by building domestic supply chains and establishing trade relations bilaterally and with a number of regions (bilateral and regional free-trade agreements) so as to form multiple links in world trade (multi-polar supply chains). In the monetary sector, the dependence of world financial markets on the domination of the US dollar went close to 0510152025303540% of GDPFedECBBoJBoERBNZRiksbankRBAUsageMax SizeNote: including loan purchases & term funing schemes;excluding short-term liquidity facilitiesGraph 9. Quantitative Easing of Developed CountriesNote: Including APP (include loan purchases) and term funding schemes;not included short-term liquidity facilitiesSource: Central Bank, RBA, compiled4.43.32.81.60.60.20.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.5IndonesiaMexicoChilePhilippinesThailandIndia% ofGDPGraph 10. Quantitative Easing of EMEsSource: Haver, Central Bank, Tellimer Research, Bank Indonesia
12BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020re-creating the global financial crisis at the end of March 2020. A systemic risk arises when all global investors simultaneously withdraw, in large numbers, their portfolio investment assets and exchange them for US dollars as a safe heaven currency. To overcome this, it is increasingly important to encourage bilateral and regional cooperation to use more local currencies in the settlement of trade and investment transactions (local currency settlement), as are steps to internationalize the Chinese Renminbi currency. In the financial sector, the growing number of hedge funds using algorithmic trading (AI machine trading) proves the vulnerability of the global financial system to pressure conditions such as at the peak of the COVID-19 pandemic at the end of March 2020. A number of initiatives were undertaken to regulate and supervise Non-Bank Financial Institutions (NBFIs), including these hedge funds in strengthening the resilience of the global financial system. National Economic Performance and Prospects: Recovery Process Underway, Stability MaintainedThe COVID-19 pandemic also had a tremendous impact on Indonesia’s health, economy and finances, especially in the second quarter of 2020. As of 25 November, there were more than 500,000 positive COVID-19 cases in Indonesia, with around 425,000 recovered patients and 16,100 deaths (Graph 11). The social restriction policies that need to be taken to prevent the spread of COVID-19 have had an impact on decreasing human mobility in almost all major cities in the period from April to June, and also have an impact on decreasing economic activity in the second quarter of 2020 (Graph 12). Human mobility has gradually improved since July 2020, in line with the easing of social restrictions in various regions, which has also stimulated improvement in Scheme 1. The Role of China in the Global Supply Chain2000$1.03 T$1.55 T$2.07 TShare of total global trade:(1) USA 15.8%(2) Germany 8%(3) Japan 6.8%(4) France 4.8%(5) UK 4.8%(6) China 4.8%(7) Canada 4.1%(8) Italy 3.5%(9) Netherlands 3.3%(10) Mexico 2.7%.................(28) Indonesia 0.8%2019$2.32 T$3.47 T$4.63 TShare of total global trade:(1) China 15.6%(2) US 13.8%(3) Germany 9.1%(4) Japan 4.9%(5) France 4.2%(6) Netherlands 4.2%(7) UK 3.8%(8) South Korea3.7%(9) Italy 3.4%(10) Mexico.3%.................(28) Indonesia 1.27%Net ImportsNet EksportsNet ImportsNet EksportsSource: Bloomberg, compiled
13BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020economic activity since the third quarter of 2020. In the monetary sector, the global financial market panic at the end of March and April 2020 resulted in a large outflow of foreign portfolio investment with a very high depreciation pressure on the Rupiah. With a strong commitment to stability policies from Bank Indonesia, the Rupiah exchange rate has strengthened significantly since the end of March 2020, thus supporting the national economic recovery. Thanks be to God, the hardest times have passed. Stability is maintained and the process of economic recovery is ongoing.National economic growth has improved since the third quarter of 2020 and will increase substantially in 2021. Economic improvement is in line with the realization of the fiscal stimulus, increased mobility of people and improving global demand. The Indonesian economy in the third quarter of 2020 grew by 5.05% (qtq) from a contraction of 4.19% (qtq), or the contraction of growth decreased to 3.49% (yoy) from 5.32% (yoy) in the previous quarter (Table 2). There was an increased realization of Government stimulus, especially in the form of social assistance, spending on other goods and services, as Component2018*2019**2019**2020***IIIIIIIVIIIIIIGDP5.175.075.055.024.975.022.97-5.32-3.49    Private Consumption5.055.025.185.014.975.042.83-5.52-4.04    Government Consumption4.805.228.230.980.483.253.75-6.909.76    Investment6.645.034.554.214.064.451.70-8.61-6.48       Non building Investment10.313.691.961.95-0.131.80-1.46-18.62-8.99       Building Investment5.415.485.465.035.535.372.76-5.26-5.60    Exports6.55-1.58-1.730.10-0.39-0.870.23-11.68-10.82    Imports11.88-7.47-6.84-8.30-8.05-7.69-2.18-16.98-21.86Table 2. GDP by Expenditure (%, yoy)Source : BPSNote: * Preliminary figures; ** Figures are very provisional; *** Figures are very, very provisional34567891011502,1104,4423.19 84.12 0204060801000100,000200,000300,000400,000500,000Conﬁrmed CasesNew Conﬁrmed CasesFatality Rate (rhs)Recovery Rate (rhs)Person(%)2020Graph 11. COVID-19 cases in IndonesiaSource: Task Force for the Acceleration of Handling COVID-19, compiledJakartaW. JavaE. JavaC. JavaBaliN. SumatraS. SumatraE. Kalimantan-45.00-40.00-35.00-30.00-25.00-20.00-15.00-10.00-5.000.005.002345620207891011IndexGraph 12. Human Mobility in Large CitiesSource: Google Mobility ReportData as of 23 November 2020
14BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020well as transfers to regions and village funds (transfer kedaerah dan dana desa - TKDD). Export performance has also improved, driven by global demand, especially from the US and China, that is recorded in a number of commodities such as iron and steel, pulp and waste paper, as well as textiles and textile products (tekstil dan produk tekstil - TPT). A number of indicators show improvement, such as community mobility, non-food and online retail sales, PMI Manufacturing, and public income. Looking ahead, economic growth is predicted to pick up on the back of the improving global economy and accelerated budget realization for the Central and Local Governments, progress on the credit restructuring program, and the continuation of Bank Indonesia monetary and macroprudential stimulus. Overall, Indonesia’s economic growth will start to be positive in the fourth quarter of 2020 and is estimated to reach 4.8% -5.8% in 2021.Spatially, economic recovery is faster in a number of areas outside Java. Economic improvement in the third quarter of 2020 was recorded in almost all regions in Indonesia, although 7 (seven) provinces, including Bali, are still under pressure (Graph 13). In fact, 2 (two) provinces had positive growth which were Central Sulawesi with 2.82% (yoy) growth and North Maluku which grew at a high rate of 6.66%, supported by the positive performance of export-oriented industries. The easing of social activities by more than 31 Regional Governments (4 Provinces and 27 Regencies/Cities) encouraged economic improvement in the third quarter of 2020. In addition, the Government’s policy of accelerating JAMBI(0.79)KEP. RIAU(5.81)KEP. BABEL(4.38)S. SUMATRA(1.40)LAMPUNG(2.41)BENGKULU(0.09)W. KALIMANTAN(4.46)C. KALIMANTAN(3.12)S. KALIMANTAN3.72E. KALIMANTAN(4.61)N. KALIMANTAN(1.46)DKI(3.82)BANTEN(5.77)W. JAVA(4.08)C. JAVA(3.93)DIY(2.84)E. JAVA(3.75)BALI(12.28)NTB(1.11)ACEH(0.11)N. SUMATRA(2.60)RIAU(1.67)W. SUMATRA(2.87)Q III ≥ Q IIQ III < Q IINTT(1.68)N. SULAWESI(1.83)PAPUA(2.61)GORONTALO(0.07)WEST PAPUA(3.35)MALUKU(2.38)NORTHMALUKU6.66W. SULAWESI(5.26)SE. SULAWESI(1.82)S. SULAWESI(1.08)C. SULAWESI2.824.504.613.23(3.10)Sumatra(2.22)III20192020IVIIIIIIIII20192020IVIIIIIINATIONAL5.024.972.97(5.32)(3.49)III20192020IVIIIIIIBalinusra 5.345.520.92(6.32)(6.80)Java5.515.343.42(6.69)(4.00)III20192020IVIIIIIISulampua2.325.21(1.48)(1.10)III20192020IVIIIIII3.55Kalimantan5.673.732.31(4.34)(4.23)III20192020IVIIIIIIGraph 13. Regional Economic Growth in Quarter III-2020 (%, yoy)Source: BPS, compiled
15BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020Transfers to Regions and Village Funds (Transfer ke Daerah dan Dana Desa - TKDD) by easing transfer requirements supported the realization of regional expenditures so as to increase regional economic improvement, especially in Java. From the external side, the recovery of the Chinese and US economies has been the driving force for improvements in the export performances of a number of industrial products in Java, Sulawesi-Maluku-Papua (Sulampua) and Sumatra. In terms of business sector, economic recovery in the Sulampua region has been driven by continued investment and increasing demand in the steel and mining industries from abroad. In Java, the economic recovery was mainly supported by improved consumption due to accelerated budget realization and increased mobility, thus supporting improvements in the industry business sector. Meanwhile, the trade sector has improved in all regions in line with improving consumption and export-import activities. The improvement in regional economic growth is expected to continue in 2021, in which the regions of Java, Sumatra, Kalimantan, Bali and Nusa Tenggara (Balinusra), and Sulampua will grow respectively by 5.2%-5.6%; 4.0%-4.4%; 2.4%-2.8%; 5.2%-5.6%; and 7.8%-8.2%.The resilience and stability of Indonesia’s external sector is well maintained.  Current account transactions in the third quarter of 2020 recorded a surplus due to improvements in exports and import adjustments in line with the weak domestic demand. This is reflected in the trade balance during the third quarter of 2020 which recorded a surplus of US $ 9.8 billion, much higher than the JAMBI(0.79)KEP. RIAU(5.81)KEP. BABEL(4.38)S. SUMATRA(1.40)LAMPUNG(2.41)BENGKULU(0.09)W. KALIMANTAN(4.46)C. KALIMANTAN(3.12)S. KALIMANTAN3.72E. KALIMANTAN(4.61)N. KALIMANTAN(1.46)DKI(3.82)BANTEN(5.77)W. JAVA(4.08)C. JAVA(3.93)DIY(2.84)E. JAVA(3.75)BALI(12.28)NTB(1.11)ACEH(0.11)N. SUMATRA(2.60)RIAU(1.67)W. SUMATRA(2.87)Q III ≥ Q IIQ III < Q IINTT(1.68)N. SULAWESI(1.83)PAPUA(2.61)GORONTALO(0.07)WEST PAPUA(3.35)MALUKU(2.38)NORTHMALUKU6.66W. SULAWESI(5.26)SE. SULAWESI(1.82)S. SULAWESI(1.08)C. SULAWESI2.824.504.613.23(3.10)Sumatra(2.22)III20192020IVIIIIIIIII20192020IVIIIIIINATIONAL5.024.972.97(5.32)(3.49)III20192020IVIIIIIIBalinusra 5.345.520.92(6.32)(6.80)Java5.515.343.42(6.69)(4.00)III20192020IVIIIIIISulampua2.325.21(1.48)(1.10)III20192020IVIIIIII3.55Kalimantan5.673.732.31(4.34)(4.23)III20192020IVIIIIII
16BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020previous quarter’s trade balance surplus of US $ 4.0 billion (Table 3). The capital and financial account balance also remains strong, mainly supported by inflows of foreign portfolio capital in line with large global liquidity, the attractiveness of domestic financial assets, and continued investor confidence in the prospect for the domestic economy. Foreign exchange reserves in October 2020 were recorded at 133.7 billion US dollars, far above the international adequacy standard. Going forward, it is estimated that Indonesia’s external stability will be maintained. The balance of payments is expected to experience a surplus with a lower current account deficit and a larger capital account surplus. The current account deficit is projected to be below 1.5% of GDP in 2020 and around 1.0%-2.0% of GDP in 2021, supporting the resilience of Indonesia’s external economic sector.With the stabilization policy of Bank Indonesia, the Rupiah exchange rate is stable and has the potential to strengthen. As stated above, the COVID-19 pandemic caused panic among investors and global market players, especially at the end of March and Component (USD billion)20182019*2019*2020**IIIIII*IV*I*II*III**Current Account-30.6-6.6-8.2-7.5-8.1-30.4-3.7-2.91.0A. Goods-0.21.30.61.40.33.54.44.09.8- Export, fob180.741.240.243.743.4168.541.734.640.8- Import, fob-181.0-39.9-39.6-42.3-43.1-164.9-37.3-30.7-31.0a. Non Oil & Gas (Net)11.22.93.12.73.212.05.83.39.4b. Oil & Gas (Net)-11.4-2.1-2.9-2.1-3.2-10.3-2.7-0.8-0.7B. Services, primary Income &      Secondary Income-30.4-7.8-8.8-8.9-8.4-33.9-8.1-6.9-8.8Capital and Financial Account25.19.96.87.412.536.6-3.110.61.01. Direct Investment12.55.95.85.23.120.14.03.91.12. Portfolio Investment9.35.54.64.67.322.0-6.19.8-1.93. Other Investment+3.3-1.6-3.6-2.42.1-5.4-1.0-3.01.8Overall Balance-7.12.4-2.00.04.34.7-8.59.22.1Memorandum:- Reserve Assets Positions120.7124.5123.8124.3129.2129.2121.0131.7135.2In Month of Import and Official Debt Repayment6.46.76.86.97.37.37.08.19.1- Current Account  (% GDP)-2.94-2.45-2.95-2.61-2.83-2.71-1.34-1.200.36Table 3. Indonesia’s Balance of PaymentsSource: Bank IndonesiaNote: * Preliminary figures; ** Figures are very provisional+ includes financial derivatives
17BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020April 2020 which prompted large capital flight flows and weakened exchange rates for various world currencies, including Indonesia. The Rupiah was under pressure and it reached Rp. 16,575 per US dollar on 23 March 2020 (Graph 14). With the stabilization steps taken by Bank Indonesia and intensive communication to investors and domestic and foreign market players, the Rupiah exchange rate has strengthened significantly again, reaching Rp. 14,165 per US dollar; or it appreciated 17.01% from 23 March 2020 to 20 November 2020 (Graph 15). Going forward, Bank Indonesia views the Rupiah exchange rate will remain stable and still has the potential to strengthen. This is in line with its fundamentally undervalued level, supported by low and controlled inflation, low current account deficit, high attractiveness of domestic financial assets and a declining risk premium for Indonesia. Bank Indonesia continues to strengthen its Rupiah exchange rate stabilization policy in accordance with its fundamentals and market mechanisms. Inflation remains low in line with weak demand and adequate supply. In October 2020, the Consumer Price Index (CPI) inflation was recorded at a low of 1.44% (yoy) (Graph 16). Low inflation was recorded in all regions of the Republic of Indonesia and for all components of core inflation, volatile food (VF), and administered prices (AP). Core inflation remains low due to weak domestic demand, consistency of Bank Indonesia policies to anchor inflation expectations, and maintained exchange rate stability. Volatile food inflation remains low in line with weak domestic demand, adequate supply, managed distribution, and a more effective coordination between National Inflation Task Force (TPI) and Regional Inflation Task Force (TPID). Meanwhile, low inflation in the administered prices category was not only due to limited human mobility, but also due to lower air transport fares. Bank Indonesia predicts that inflation -1.30-1.77-2.36-4.54-6.42-7.88-8.01-8.72-9.31-9.69-16.24-21.51-21.68-25.0-20.0-15.0-10.0-5.00.0PHPCNYJPYEURINRSGDMYRKRWTRYTHBIDRZARBRLpoint-to-point(%)Graph 14. Rupiah Exchange Rate Againts US Dollar   vs Several Countries: 31 Dec 2019 - 23 March 2020Source: Reuters and Bloomberg, compiledpoint-to-point17.0115.8413.708.808.758.667.106.414.392.87-4.05-9.54-14.09-20.00-15.00-10.00-5.000.005.0010.0015.0020.00IDRZARKRWTHBSGDMYRJPYPHPCNYINRBRLEURTRY(%)Graph 15. Rupiah Exchange Rate Againts US Dollar   vs Several Countries: 23 March - 20 November, 2020Source: Reuters and Bloomberg, compiledCPICoreVolatile FoodAdministered PriceTarget Range13579112016(%,yoy)135791120171357911201813579112019135792020-2October - 2020:CPI = 1.44Core =1.74VF = 1.32AP = 0.46024681012Graph 16. Inflation: Core, Volatile Food, and    Administered PricesSource: BPS, compiled
18BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020at the end of 2020 will be lower than 2% and in 2021 will be controlled within the target of 3.0±1% (Graph 17). Bank Indonesia consistently maintains price stability and strengthens policy coordination with the Government, both at the central and regional levels through the Inflation Task Force (TPI and TPID), in order to keep inflation within its target range.Financial system stability was maintained amidst weak credit growth. The capital adequacy ratio (CAR) of banks in September 2020 was recorded at 23.41%, and the ratio of non-performing loans (NPL) was recorded at 3.15% (gross) and 1.07% (net), respectively. (Graph 18). However, the intermediation function of the financial sector is still weak due to limited credit growth in line with weak domestic demand as a result of depressed business performance and banking prudence due to the continuing COVID-19 pandemic. Credit in October 2020 contracted by -0.47% (yoy), meanwhile, growth in Third Party Funds (TPF) was recorded at a higher rate of 12.12% (yoy) (Graph 19). The weak credit growth in October 2020 occurred in almost all regions of Indonesia, except in West Nusa Tenggara and Papua. Going forward, banking intermediation is predicted to improve. Growth in credit and Third Party Fundsin 2021 is estimated to increase each by 7.0% -9.0% respectively. This prediction is consistent with the prospect of economic recovery as well as continued fiscal and monetary as well as macroprudential policy stimulus. Corporate performance has also gradually improved and reflected in increased sales, ability to pay, and tax revenues, particularly in the Industry and Trade sectors. Payment System Transactions increased in line with economic improvements, accompanied by accelerated economic and financial digitalization. The growth of currency in circulation (Uang Kartal Yang Diedarkan - UYD) in October 2020 was Range Inﬂation TargetInﬂation Realization(%, yoy) 3.353.023.613.132.7201234567201520162017201820192020*Graph 17. Realization and National Inflation TargetsSource: BPS and Bank Indonesia projections3.1523.4120212122222323242425252.02.53.03.54.04.55.0481248124812481248920162017201820192020NPL (Gross)CAR (rhs)(%)(%)Graph 18. Bank Capital and Non Performing LoansSource: Bank Indonesia, OJK, compiled-0.4712.12-2024681012141618201520162017201820192020CreditDeposits(%)481248124812481248124810Graph 19. Growth in Banking Credit and DepositsSource: Bank Indonesia
19BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020recorded at 14.61% (yoy) amounting to Rp. 806.8 trillion. Payment transactions using ATMs, Debit Cards, and Credit Cards showed a lower growth contraction to 3.97% (yoy) in October 2020 (Graph 20). On the other hand, digital economic and financial transactions continue to grow positively in line with the use of digital platforms and instruments during the pandemic, as well as the strong public preferences and acceptance of digital transactions. The value of EU transactions in October 2020 continued to grow positively by 14.80% (yoy). The value of digital banking transactions recorded a positive growth of 10.50% (yoy) in September 2020. (Graph 21). Likewise, e-commerce transactions and the use of the Indonesian Standard Quick Response Code (QRIS) in various transactions have increased rapidly. Going forward, Bank Indonesia believes that the development of the digital financial economy in Indonesia will be more rapid, especially e-commerce transactions, electronic money, and digital banking, thus supporting the national economic recovery from the retail and MSME sectors. Bank Indonesia continues to accelerate the digitalization of payments through the implementation of the 2025 Indonesian Payment System Blueprint (Blueprint Sistem Pembayaran Indonesia - BSPI), in collaboration with the Government, banking, fintech, and e-commerce. In addition, the rapid growth of the digital financial economy is also in line with the improving national economic conditions and increasing public preference and acceptance of digital transactions. The prospects for Indonesia’s economic recovery in 2021 will improve in the following years and return to a trajectory towards an advanced Indonesia in the medium term. The acceleration of economic growth with a better economic structure is supported by the acceleration of economic transformation through a series of structural reform policies directed at 5 (five) main strategies. First, development of reliable human resources with mastery of technology. Second, infrastructure development that supports industrial connectivity, including MSMEs and tourism. Third, improving the investment and business climate that is better supported by the streamlining of regulations through the implementation of the Job Creation Law and the development and deepening of the financial market which encourages the strengthening of sources of development financing. Fourth, strengthening priority sectors that are competitive and with high added value; and fifth, optimizing the use of technology to support digital-based economic transformation. The increased economic capacity which is supported by increased economic efficiency and productivity, as a result of a series of structural reforms, promotes higher and more sustainable economic growth towards an advanced -2.2-41.3-3.514.8-50050100150200250300350400450500-60-50-40-30-20-1001020302468101224681012246810122468101224681020162017201820192020 ATM-Debit CardCredit Card TotalElectronic Money (rhs)(%,yoy)(%,yoy)Graph 20. Growth in use of ATM Cards, Credit Cards,   and Electronic MoneySource: Bank Indonesia12345678910111212345678920192020SMS/Mobile BankingInternet BankingGrowth (rhs)10.50 (30)(20)(10)01020304050 - 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100(%,yoy)IDR MillionGraph 21. Growth in Digital BankingSource: Bank Indonesia
20BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020Indonesia with maintained stability. We predict that in the medium term, Indonesia’s economic growth will continue to pick up to be in the range of 5.5% - 6.1% with inflation maintained at a low level of 1.5% - 3.5% and a current account deficit in the range of 1.5% - 2.5% of GDP in 2025. Overall, with this projected trajectory, Indonesia is predicted to become a high-income developed country by 2045.Bank Indonesia Policy Mix 2020: Strengthening Stability, Supporting National Economic Recovery The improvement in the performance of the national economy is supported by synergy and close policy coordination among Government, Bank Indonesia, Financial Services Authority(Otoritas Jasa Keuangan - OJK), the Deposit Insurance Agency (Lembaga Penjamin Simpanan - LPS) and other related parties. In 2020, the government provided a relatively large fiscal stimulus with a deficit of Rp. 1,039.2 trillion or 6.3% of GDP. This included the budget for handling COVID-19 and the national economic recovery program of Rp. 695.2 trillion for the public goods (i.e. health, social assistance, and public services) amounting to Rp. 397.6 trillion, as well as non-public goods (namely incentives to MSMEs, business, and corporations) amounting to Rp. 297.6 trillion. Bank Indonesia, in addition to stabilizing the Rupiah exchange rate, also provided a large monetary stimulus in the form of lowering interest rates and quantitive easing, as well as easing macroprudential policies and digitalizing the payment system. Through the “burden sharing” mechanism with the Government, Bank Indonesia provides financing and and bears the burden of the entire public goods budget of Rp. 397.6 trillion in the 2020 State Budget through direct purchase of Government Securities (Surat Berhaga Negara - SBN), and also bears the burden of around 60% of the SBN interest for the non-public goods budget for MSMEs and corporations in the amount of Rp. 117.0 trillion in the 2020 State Budget. Meanwhile, OJK provides relaxation for banks in restructuring their credit by delaying installments of principal and interest of credit toavoid increasing non-performing loans and worsening capital. Likewise, the theLPS also ensures that public savings in the banking sector are guaranteed to support the stability of the financial system. Bank Indonesia is fully committed to directing all policy instruments for the national economic recovery. Since the outbreak of of COVID-19, Bank Indonesia’s policy mix has been strengthened and closely coordinated with the Government and the KSSK for national economic recovery, while maintaining macroeconomic and financial system stability. Bank Indonesia is committed to provide financing to the 2020 State Budget through the purchase of Government Securities (SBN) from the primary market or directly, so that the Government can focus on accelerating budget realization. Provision of liquidity is also continuously provided for banks to support the credit restructuring program and the business sector. The strengthening of the Bank Indonesia policy mix covers the following 6 (six) aspects: i. A decrease in the BI 7-Day Reverse Repo Rate (BI7DRR) which was cut 5 (five) times in 2020 by 125 bps to 3.75%. This decision is in line with the need to boost economic growth, amidst low inflation and relatively stable Rupiah exchange rate. This Bank Indonesia policy interest rate is the lowest level in history.ii. Rupiah exchange rate stabilization policy through intervention on the spot market, Domestic Non-Deliverable Forward (DNDF), and purchases of SBN from the secondary market, amid continuing uncertainty global financial market.iii. Quantitative Easing by injecting large amounts of liquidity into banks to support the national economic recovery program. Quantitative easing is carried out by, among others, monetary expansion and a reduction in the reserve requirement (Giro Wajib Minimum - GWM).iv. Relaxation of macroprudential policies to boost credit and financing for the economy, such as the Macroprudential Intermediation Ratio (MIR), Loan to Value (LTV) ratio, or lending down-payment for green motor vehicle loans. 
21BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020v. Provision of funding and burden sharing for the 2020 State Budget to support the national economic recovery program through the purchase of SBN from the primary market (based on the Joint Decree by the Minister of Finance and Governor of Bank Indonesia dated 16 April 2020) and direct purchase (based on the Joint Decree by the Minister of Finance and Governor of Bank Indonesia 7 July 2020). Also, providing funding for LPS to anticipate and handle problem banks through the repo mechanism and / or purchase of SBN (PP No. 33 of 2020).vi. Accelerate digitalization of payment systems based on the Payment System Blueprint (BSPI) 2025 to expand the digital economy and finance as part of economic recovery efforts, through electronification of the distribution of Government social assistance, expansion of QRIS, and collaboration between banks and fintech for easy access for MSMEs and the public to financial services.Rupiah Exchange Rate Stabilization PolicyWith the stabilization policy adopted by Bank Indonesia, the Rupiah exchange rate strengthened significantly, which was conducive to the national economic recovery. Bank Indonesia’s stabilization policy was supported by intensive communication with investors as well as domestic and foreign market players. As we have previously stated, the Rupiah, which touched Rp. 16,575per US dollars on 23 March 2020, then strengthened to Rp. 14,165 per US dollar on 20 November 2020. Investor’s confidence have improved as can be seen in renewed foreign portfolio flows into Indonesia. From 14 April to 20 November 2020, foreign portfolio inflows to the SBN market were recorded at Rp. 48.6 trillion (Graph 22). Foreign reserves pick up and reach 133.7 billion US dollars at the end of October 2020, higher than the level before COVID-19. We are of the view that the current Rupiah exchange rate is still fundamentally undervalued, and, God willing, the Rupiah still has the potential to strengthen. The stability and strengthening of the Rupiah exchange rate is supported by a number of factors, namely: (a) low and controlled inflation, (b) low current account deficit, which is below 1.5% of GDP for the whole of 2020, (c) high interest rate differential between domestic interest and overseas market (Graph 23), (d) increased foreign exchange reserves, and (e) reduced risk premiums in line with less uncertainty on global and domestic financial markets. -50-40-30-20-1001020JanIJanIIIJanVFebIIFebIVMarIIMarIVAprIIMayIMayIIIJunIJulIJulIIIJulVAugIAugIIISepISepIIISepVOctIIOctIVNovIIJunIIIAprIVIDR Trillion0-<5 Years5-<10 Years>10 YearsGraph 22. Foreign Investment Flows to SBNSource: Bank IndonesiaTRZABRIDMXRUINDCNSKPLTH1.204874724612541540516242213535603006009001,2001,500bpsGraph 23. Yield Spread on Government Bond    against USTSource: Bloomberg, compiled
22BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020Monetary Policy Stimulus Lower interest rates and relaxation of Bank Indonesia’s monetary policy has led to lower bank interest rates and financial market stability, although the decline in lending rates is still modest. As we noted above, during 2020 Bank Indonesia lowered the monetary policy rate by 125 bps, bringing the BI7DRR interest rate to 3.75%. This Bank Indonesia policy interest rate is a record-low in the history of Indonesian economy. The decline in the BI7DRR interest rate and the easing of liquidity pursued by Bank Indonesia was accompanied by a 154 bps cut in the Interbank Money Market (Pasar Uang Antar Bank - PUAB) interest rate, resulting in a very low overnight PUAB interest rate of around 3.27% in November 2020 (Graph 24). Likewise, the yield on 10-year SBNs also fell by 75 bps from a high of 8.31% at the end of March 2020 to 6.13% on 18 November 2020. Banking interest rates also went down, particularly deposit rates by 138 bps to 4.93%, despite the 70 bps drop in lending rates to 9.84% at the end of October 2020 (Graph 25). With the large decline in policy interest rates and the easing of Bank Indonesia’s monetary policy, the slow decline in bank credit interest rates is due to increased credit risk that requires banks to increase their reserves. We hope that banks will be able to accelerate the reduction in loan interest rates, thereby supporting credit growth and financing for the national economic recovery. To encourage financing for business and the national economic recovery, Bank Indonesia also extended the monetary stimulus in the form of a quantitative easing (QE) policy to a large number of banks. As of 20 November 2020, Bank Indonesia has injected Rupiah liquidity of around Rp. 682.0 trillion or nearly 4% of GDP, mainly from a reduction in the statutory reserve requirement (Giro Wajib Minimum - GWM) of around Rp. 155 trillion and a monetary expansion of around Rp. 511.2 trillion. As shown in Graph 10, the amount of QE by Bank Indonesia is the largest among EMEs countries. In more detail, the expansion of monetary operations was carried out through provision of term-repos to banks with underlying SBN and FX swaps totaling Rp. 345.0 trillion. Monetary expansion was also carried out through the purchase of SBN from the secondary market amounting to Rp. 166.2 trillion, as part of the Rupiah exchange rate stabilization policy pursued by Bank Indonesia. This was conducted, particularly in the period of March and April 2020 when there was a withdrawal of foreign portfolio investment, particularly from Government SBNs, that put pressure on the Rupiah. In addition, Bank Indonesia cut the Rupiah reserve requirement 3 (three) times by 300 bps, thereby increasing liquidity to around Rp. 155 trillion during 2020. Bank Indonesia also did not JIBOR O/N (IndONIA)JIBOR 1 monthJIBOR 12 months3.043.834.513.004.005.006.007.008.009.0010.00(%)152015201620172018201920209159159159159159Graph 24. JIBOR Interest Rate (O/N, 1 month, 12 months)Data as of 20 November 202046810121416147101471014710147101471014710201520162017201820192020Lending RateDeposit RateInvestment Lending RateConsumption Lending RateWorking Capital Lending Rate(%)11.059.849.389.014.93Graph 25. Banking Interest RatesSource: Bank Indonesia, compiledSource: Bank Indonesia
23BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020impose additional demand deposits penalty if banks do not comply with Macroprudential Intermediation Ratio, thereby increasing liquidity by around 15.8 trillion.Monetary Policy Mix and Macroprudential Policy Bank Indonesia has relaxed its macroprudential policy to encourage bank lending and financing . During 2020, Bank Indonesia relaxed the regulation on Macroprudential Intermediation Ratio (RIM / RIM Sharia), which is the ratio between financing and bank funding, without imposing penalties on banks that have RIM or RIM Sharia outside the target range, that has been set at 84% - 94%, for the next year starting from 1 May 2020 (Graph 26). The provisions for the Loan to Value (LTV) ratio, namely the down payment policy in bank credit distribution, for environmentally sound motor vehicle loans were also relaxed to 0% (Graph 27). In addition, regulation on Macroprudential Liquidity Support (Penyangga Likuiditas Makroprudensial - PLM / PLM Sharia), namely the ratio of liquid assets in the form of ownership of SBN and SBI as liquidity buffer, was strengthened from 4% to 6% Deposits for conventional banks and to 4.5% against Rupiah Deposits for Islamic banks. All securities used for compliance of or RIM sharia can be repoed to Bank Indonesia to meet liquidity needs. We view that the easing of the macroprudential policy can provide flexibility for banks in channeling credit to promote national economic recovery while maintaining priority on sustaining financial system stability.The reduction in interest rates and relaxation of  monetary and macroprudential policies by Bank Indonesia have provided support maintain financial system stability. Ample liquidity conditions in the banking sector were reflected in the high ratio of Liquid Assets to Third Party Funds (LA / TPF), namely 30.65% in October 2020. Per the BUKU (Bank Umum Kegiatan Usaha / Commercial Bank Business Activities) bank group, LA / TPF ratio reached around 28.91% to 34.19% for BUKU bank 2 to BUKU bank 4, while the LA / TPF ratio for BUKU bank 1 was also relatively high, namely at 17.83% (Graph 28). Deposit growth in the banking sector was also high, namely 12.12% (yoy) in October 2020, while credit growth contracted 0.47% (yoy). Related to monetary aggregates, growth in the M1 and M2 in October 2020 remained high, at 18.5% (yoy) and 12.5%   (yoy). The extraordinary liquidity easing by Bank Indonesia in remains circulated in the banking and money market, and is not yet channeled to the real sector in the form of credit. However, on the other hand, lowering interest rates and loosening liquidity played an important role in maintaining financial 0.10.20.00.20.00.00.00.0NPL/NPF (Bruto) <5% &CARIncentive<CAR<19%NPL/NPF (Bruto) <5% &CAR>19%CAR ≥ CARIncentiveCAR < CARIncentiveLower Disincentive ParametersUpper Disincentive ParametersBeforeAfterGraph 26. RIM’s Disincentive ParametersSource: Bank Indonesia13.311.713.37.502468101214PropertiesMotor VehiclesBeforeAfter(%)Graph 27. Average LTV/FTV Down Payment for Property   and Environmentally Friendly Motor VehiclesSource: Bank Indonesia
24BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020system stability. This was primarily due to maintained risk in interest rate and liquidity aspect. Moreover, the liquidity loosening has also played a favourable role in bank profitability by improving revenue from investing its liquidity in SPN and SBN instruments, in addition to interbank lending (Pinjaman Antar Bank - PUAB). Overall, ownership of securities in banks reached Rp. 1,443 trillion at the end of October 2020, most of which were owned by BUKU bank 3 and 4 (Graph 29).Weak demand is the dominant factor in explaining a contraction of credit (Graph 30). Credit in October 2020 contracted by 0.47% (yoy) despite high growth in banks deposits of 12.12% (yoy). On the supply side, banking capacity to provide lending was more than adequate in line with the easing of Bank Indonesia’s monetary policy in the form of lowering interest rates and large liquidity injections, as well as a relaxation of macroprudential policies. The banking survey by Bank Indonesia in the third quarter of 2020 also showed that the standard of lending was improving (Graph 31). Therefore, we view that this low credit growth condition is caused mainly by weak demand. This is closely related to weak domestic demand and unfavorable (%)Group of Business Activities 1Group of Business Activities 2Group of Business Activities 3Group of Business Activities 44017.8330.9734.1928.9105101520253035123456789101112123456789101112123456789101112123456789102017201820192020Graph 28. LA / TPF Ratio per BUKU BankSource: Bank Indonesia 0 200 400 600 800 1,000 1,200 1,400 1,60021345620182019202078910111221345678910111221345678910IDR TrillionGroup of Business Activities 1Group of Business Activities 2Group of Business Activities 3Group of Business Activities 4Graph 29. SBN Ownership per BUKU BankSource: Bank Indonesia-0.15-0.1-0.0500.050.1 7.4 7.6 7.8 8.0 8.2 8.4 8.6 8.8 9.014710147101471014710147101471014710147920132014201520162017201820192020Excess Supply (+)/Demand (-) (rhs)DemandSupply(Log)(Log)Graph 30. Estimates of Credit Demand and Supply Source: Bank Indonesia, staff calculations12.412.011.08.1-10010203040IIIIIIIVIIIIIIIVIIIIIIIVIIIIIIIV*2017201820192020Tighter(Index)*)EstimationLooserGraph 31. Standard Lending IndexSource: Bank Indonesia Banking Survey Q3 2020Description: * projection
25BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020conditions in the business sector due to  economic slowdown caused by COVID-19 pandemic as described above. As domestic economy recovers in the aftermath of COVID-19 pandemic, the gradual easing of restrictions on human mobility, acceleration of the realization of the APBN and APBD by the Government, a loose mix of monetary and macroprudential policies including more than adequate banking liquidity by Bank Indonesia, as well as progress on credit restructuring by banks, we estimate that bank lending and financing from the capital market will gradually pick up going forward. Implementation of Law No. 2 of 2020: Supporting State Finances and Financial System Stability Bank Indonesia has followed up through all the authorities given by Law Number 2 of 2020 as part of the national policy response to a situation of extreme urgency due to the COVID-19 pandemic. As it is known, the national policy response in Law no. 2 of 2020 includes state budget policies and financial system stability policies. In this regard, the authority of Bank Indonesia related to state budget policies in Law no. 2/2020 includes the purchase of SBN in the primary market from the Government, while related to financial system stability policies include improvements to the Short-Term Liquidity Loan / Sharia Short-Term Liquidity Financing (Pinjaman Likuiditas Jangka Pendek/Pembiayaan Likuditas Jangka Pendek Syariah - PLJP / PLJPS), purchase / repo of SBN with LPS, foreign exchange activities regulation, and access funding to corporations/private sector by means of repo of Government Securities/State Sharia Securities (Surat Utang Negara/Surat Berharga Syariah Negara - SUN / SBSN) through banks. Bank Indonesia’s follow-up on the authority of Law no. 2 of 2020 is as follows:i. Long-term SUN / SBSN purchases on the primary market for APBN state budget financing in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic and national economic recovery (Article 16 (1) (c) & 19) have been implemented based on 2 (two) agreements between the Ministry of Finance and Bank Indonesia. First, the purchase of SUN / SBSN from the primary market by Bank Indonesia through a market mechanism to provide financing for 2020 State Budget in accordance with the Joint Decree by the Minister of Finance and the Governor of Bank Indonesia dated 16 April 2020. Second, direct purchase of SUN / SBSN by Bank Indonesia for financing as well as burden sharing of the 2020 State Budget in a Joint Decree by the Minister of Finance and the Governor of Bank Indonesia dated 7 July 2020.ii. The provision of PLJP / PLJPS to solvent and healthy banks (Article 16 (1) (a) and 17) has been followed up with changes to the two Bank Indonesia Regulations (PBI) No.22 / 5 / PBI / 2020 and PBI No.22 / 6 / PBI / 2020 dated 30 April 2020 which was later revised with the third amendment in PBI No.22 / 15/2020 and PBI No.22 / 16/2020 dated 29 September 2020. iii. Provision of Special Liquidity Loans (Pinjaman Likuiditas Khusus - PLK) to Systemic Banks experiencing liquidity difficulties that do not meet the requirements of PLJP / PLJPS guaranteed by the Government based on the KSSK Decree (Article 16 (1) (b) & 18). We discussed this at the Board of Governors Meeting on 27 May 2020 and currently it is still in discussion at KSSK.iv. Purchases and / or repurchase agreement (repo) transactions of SBN with the Deposit Insurance Corporation to recover the cost incurred for handling solvency problems of Systemic Banks and Banks Other Than Systemic Banks (Article 16 (1) (d) & 20). The mechanism has been followed up as set forth in the amendment to the Memorandum of Understanding between Bank Indonesia and IDIC dated 23 July 2020.v. Regulations on the obligation to receive and use foreign exchange for residents, including provisions regarding the transfer, repatriation and conversion of foreign exchange to maintain macroeconomic and financial system stability (Article 16 (1) (e)), have been followed up with a plan to issue a Bank Indonesia Regulation (PBI) concerning the obligation to repatriate 
26BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020foreign exchange proceeds from the export of natural resources. Consultation on the PBI implementation plan for the banking and the business community has been carried out. However, until now we have no plans to enforce it.vi. Funding to corporations / private companies by means of repo SUN / SBSN owned by corporations / private through banking (Article 16 (1) (f)) can be implemented with existing regulation(PBI and PDG of Monetary Operations.Bank Indonesia is fully committed to realizing the purchase of SBN from the primary market for funding and burden sharing for the 2020 State Budget to support national economic recovery in accordance with Law no. 2 of 2020. As stated above, the purchase of SUN / SBSN on the primary market by Bank Indonesia for financing the 2020 State Budget is carried out through 2 (two) “Burden Sharing” mechanisms. First, the Joint Agreement by the Minister of Finance and the Governor of Bank Indonesia dated 16 April 2020 regarding the Purchase of SUN / SBSN from the primary market by Bank Indonesia through a market mechanism. In this case, the purchase of SUN / SBSN can be made through a non-competitive bidder in the main auction, a green shoe option in an additional auction, or a private placement. Second, the Joint Agreement by the Minister of Finance and the Governor of Bank Indonesia dated 7 July 2020 regarding the purchase of SUN / SBSN directly for the financing of the 2020 State Budget, as a follow-up to the decision by Commission XI-DPR RI at the Working Meeting on 6 July 2020. Direct purchase of SUN / SBSN for public goods financing in the 2020 State Budget is Rp. 397.56 trillion, namely for health, social assistance, and public services, all of which are borne by Bank Indonesia. In addition, Bank Indonesia also bears the burden of financing non-public goods in the 2020 State Budget related to MSME and corporate incentives totaling Rp. 177.03 trillion. The large amount of funding and burden sharing by Bank Indonesia for the 2020 State Budget allows the Government to focus on accelerating budget realization for national economic recovery. Since the signing of the Joint Agreement between the Minister of Finance and the Governor of Bank Indonesia regarding the “Burden Sharing” scheme I, up until 20 November 2020 Bank Indonesia has purchased SBN from the primary market amounting to Rp. 72.5 trillion in 31 (thirty one) auctions conducted by the Government during 2020. Meanwhile, the realization of funding and burden sharing for public goods funding in the 2020 State Budget by Bank Indonesia through the direct purchase of SBN is in accordance with the Joint Decree by the Minister of Finance and the Governor of Bank Indonesia dated 7 July 2020 (“Burden Sharing” II Scheme) to 20 November 2020, amounted to Rp. 297.03 trillion. Thus, the overall purchase of SBN by Bank Indonesia along with the distribution of the burden for funding the 2020 State Budget has reached Rp. 369.52 trillion. In addition, Bank Indonesia will also realize the burden sharing with the Government for funding the 2020 State Budget for Non Public Goods-MSMEs amounting to Rp. 114.81 trillion in accordance with the Joint Decree by the Minister of Finance and the Governor of Bank Indonesia dated 7 July 2020 (“Burden Sharing” Scheme II). With the commitment of Bank Indonesia in purchasing SBN from the primary market, the Government can focus on efforts to accelerate the realization of the State Budget to encourage national economic recovery.  Bank Indonesia refined the PLJP / PLJPS provisions to provide liquidity for solvent and healthy banks to strengthen financial system stability. As stated, two improvements were made so that the PLJP / PLPS provision could be implemented and that it conformed to international standards in supporting financial system stability. The third improvement has been published in PBI No. 22/15/2020 and PBI No. 22/16/2020 on 29 September 2020 regarding the third change of PLJP to conventional banks and PLJPS to Islamic banks respectively. Improvements in particular related to interest rate settings, simplification 
27BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020of credit collateral requirements, as well as the verification and valuation process for credit collateral by KAP / KJPP in the banking application process for PLJP / PLJPS. We have also established the Macroprudential-Microprudential Supervision Coordination Forum (Forum Koordinasi Pengawasan Makroprudensial-Mikroprudensial - FKMM) between Bank Indonesia and OJK for this purpose, according to the Joint Agreement between the Governor of Bank Indonesia and the Chairman of the OJK Board of Commissioners, dated 19 October 2020. In this case, the granting of PLJP / PLJPS was agreed to be part of the supervisory action by OJK so that banks that need and fulfill the requirements of PLJP / PLJPS are required to prepare verification and valuation of credit collateral by KAP / KJPP so that Bank Indonesia will be able to accelerate the provision of PLJP / PLJPS in the event that it is needed. Digitalization of Payment Systems: Accelerating National Digital Economic and Financial Integration To encourage the digital economy and finance as sources of economic growth, Bank Indonesia is accelerating the digitalization of the payment system with the implementation of the 2025 Indonesian Payment System Blueprint (Blueprint Sistem Pembayaran Indonesia - BSPI). This is in line with the 5 (five) directives of the President on 3 August 2020 to accelerate digital transformation towards an advanced Indonesia. The acceleration of digitalization of the payment system is an implementation of the 5 (five) visions in BSPI 2025 which we launched in May 2019, that are directed at encouraging: (i) integration of the national digital financial economy, particularly the retail and MSME sectors, (ii) banking digitization (open banking) ), (iii) digital banking interlink with fintech, (iv) start-up innovation while still considering the principle of prudence, and (v) basing national interests in payment system cooperation between countries. BSPI 2025 is implemented through 5 (five) main initiatives, namely: (i) digitalization of banking through open banking and interlinking with fintech through Application Programming Interface (API), (ii) digitizing retail payment systems through expanding QRIS and developing BI-FAST Payment, (iii) development of large value payment system infrastructure and modern and international standard financial markets, (iv) development of public infrastructure for data through Data Hub and Payment ID, and (v) progressive regulatory reform and development friendly industry. A number of rapid advances have been made in the implementation of the 2025 BSPI, in close synergy with banks and the Indonesian Payment System Association (Asosiasi Sistem Pembayaran Indonesia - ASPI), OJK, and the Government (Central and Regional). Digitalization of the payment system has driven digital economy transactions through e-commerce amid the COVID-19 pandemic. While economic transactions and physical payments have decreased, in 2020 the nominal value of e-commerce transactions is estimated to reach Rp. 253 trillion, up 23% from 2019, and expected to again increase by 33.2% to Rp. 337 trillion in 2021 (Graph 32). In addition to increasing public preferences amidst limited mobility due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the rapid increase in e-commerce transactions is also driven by a number of marketplace strategies, such as promotional events with free shipping and cashback, safe shopping on official e-commerce platforms, convenience for consumers to choose goods through 42.2105.6205.52533370501001502002503003502017201820192020*2021*IDR TrillionGraph 32. Nominal of E-Commerce TransactionsSource: Bank IndonesiaDescription: * Proyeksi Bank Indonesia
28BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020interactive communication, and the use of big data and algorithms that enable a personal shopping experience. In line with the fast pace of e-commerce transactions, digital payment transactions also increased rapidly, as reflected in the use of Electronic Money (EU) which reached 42.8% in e-commerce transactions in the third quarter of 2020,increased by 225.3% (yoy) from 2019 (Graph 33). Meanwhile, payment methods via bank transfer and cash accounted for 24.8% and 14.7% of e-commerce transactions, respectively.  The national and regional QRIS expansion campaign is able to accelerate the digital financial economy, particularly MSMEs and retail trade. Since its launch in August 2019, Bank Indonesia has carried out a massive campaign using QRIS as the only standard used in Indonesia, both nationally and in various regions, especially for MSMEs, traditional markets, and the academic world. The campaign was carried out through all 46 (forty six) Bank Indonesia offices in synergy with banks, payment system associations, institutional ministries, local governments, and strategic partners. QRIS provides various advantages, namely it is fast with recorded transactions, efficient and free of charge, “cool” and up-to-date because it is supervised by Bank Indonesia, and more hygienic because there is no physical contact. The use of QRIS in payment transactions is increasingly widespread and popular throughout Indonesia. This can be seen from the rapidly increasing development of QRIS, both in terms of volume and the nominal value of transactions as well as the number of merchants (Graph 34). Currently, the use of QRIS has connected approximately 5.3 million retail merchants nationally (Table 4). Most of these merchants are MSMEs, with more than 3.4 million Micro Business (Usaha Mikro - UMI) merchants and around 1 million Small Business (Usaha Kecil - UKE) merchants. Through QRIS, the digitalization of MSMEs can be 0IIIIIIIV2017IIIIIIIV2018IIIIIIIV2019IIIIII2020102030405060708090100%68.7362.1956.7756.5556.0455.2957.4757.5052.2844.3740.0231.5527.563.3437.377.789.3810.149.684.2127.2524.832.6942.819.055.6914.693.2645.799.713.4933.9314.535.5510.904.0526.3116.493.639.514.3122.0218.872.637.725.2218.1019.732.005.4713.5720.750.741.965.6814.6119.920.252.045.9014.2222.570.161.776.3113.3922.410.081.657.4112.4721.810.101.257.5316.1918.540.150.727.4312.4617.320.180.257.4811.1812.180.250.11Credit Without CardCoD / CashOtherBank TransferCredit Card / Online DebitElectronic MoneyKiosk / MinimarketGraph 33. E-Commerce Payment MethodsSource: Bank Indonesia01234520206789 01002003004005006007008009002468101214MillionIDR BillionNumbers of MerchantTransactions VolumeTransactions Amount (rhs)Graph 34. Development of QRISSource: Bank IndonesiaMerchants’ Criteria22March 202013 November 2020Growth(%)Large Enterprises 129,834  284,309 119%Medium Enterprises 265,077  489,770 85%Small Enterprises 304,420  1,069,490 251%Micro Enterprises 2,378,026  3,426,123 44%Donation/Social 3,996  12,763 219%TOTAL 3,081,353  5,282,455 71%Table 4. QRIS Registered MerchantsSource: Bank Indonesia
29BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020accelerated so that it supports national economic and financial inclusion, including the availability of MSME data, which has been one of the obstacles in its development. Moreover, the expansion of the use of QRIS nationally and in the regions has overcome many of the previous problems associated with using QR from other countries in Indonesia.  Electronification payments for distribution of social assistance programs, modes of transportation, as well as electronification of local government finances also accelerates the digital economy and finance. Payment electronification supports the distribution of Government social assistance in a more targeted, correct amount, on time, and with better governance. Until September 2020, Rp. 29.1 trillion in non-cash social assistance has been distributed to the Family Hope Program (Program Keluarga Harapan - PKH) and Rp. 30.0 trillion for the Basic Food Program (Scheme 2). Likewise, the electronification of various modes of transportation continues to be expanded, both for air, land and sea transportation. Moreover, the electronification of regional government financial transactions has progressed rapidly. To date, 542 Regional Governments have electronified their financial transactions, namely 34 provinces, 93 cities and 415 districts. The level of payment electronification varies from Cash Management System (CMS), online SP2D, to the use of QRIS, Electronic Money, and online banking. The electronification of local government financial transactions is not only for collecting taxes and levies, but also for spending and expenses. Payment electronification has been proven to increase tax revenue, expenditure efficiency and optimization, and strengthen local government financial governance.Digitization of the payment system has also accelerated the development of fintech and digitalized banking. Payment transactions using Electronic Money in 2020 are estimated to have increased from 2019 by 38.4% to Rp. 201 trillion, and Scheme 2. Electronification of Government Social Assistance PaymentsFrequency of distribution: monthlyFrequency of distribution: monthlyTarget 2020Nominal: Rp37.4 TAfter Covid-19Target 2020After Covid-19PKHStapleFoodPKHSTAPLEFOODPROGRAMuntil July 202064.38%of target24.1 T51.31%of target22.4 Tuntil August 202071.09%of target26.6 T60.14%of target26.2 Tuntil September 202077.90%of target29.1 T60.85%of target30.0 TRecipient: 10 million KPMNominal: Rp43.6 TRecipient: 20 million KPMREALIZATION OF NON-CASH SOCIAL ASSISTANCE (PKH AND STAPLE FOOD PROGRAM)Source: Bank Indonesia
30BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020are expected to increase by 32.3% to Rp. 266 trillion in 2021 (Graph 35). Meanwhile, digital banking payment transactions via SMS / mobile banking and online banking in 2020 are estimated to reach Rp. 27,036 trillion, slightly higher than in 2019, and are expected to increase significantly by 19.1% to Rp. 32,206 trillion in 2021 (Graph 36). About 15 banks have carried out a digital transformation so as to improve digital financial services, such as opening savings accounts, transfers and payments online, to live-chat services with customers. This development shows that digital banking in Indonesia has developed rapidly, and is able to catch up and even compete with payment transactions through fintech. Bank Indonesia continues to accelerate digital payment transactions through digital banking and fintech as well as interlinking both through Open API (Application Programming Interface) standards so that the public and the business world can choose which one is the cheapest, fastest, and safest.In Rupiah currency management, Bank Indonesia has also carried out a transformation in the printing and circulation of money through centralization, automation and efficiency, throughout the Republic of Indonesia. This transformation is directed at providing currency fit for circulation, appropriate denomination, “just in time”, is “central bank driven”, aligning the direction of non-cash policies and taking into account efficiency and national interests. The transformation is carried out through three pillars. The first pillar, Availability of Quality and Reliable Rupiah Currency, is through strengthening planning for meeting the needs of the Rupiah currency; strengthening of materials, safety elements and designs of Rupiah currency; preparing the implementation of redenomination, as well as strengthening integrity and a culture program to care for the Rupiah. The second pillar, Efficient Money Distribution System and Prime Cash Services is through efficient money distribution networks, strengthening cash services, and strengthening institutional architecture. The third pillar, Development of Adequate and Technology-Based Rupiah Currency Management Infrastructure, is through digitizing processing of the Rupiah currency, infrastructure optimization, as well as integrated and compatible cash equipment. The transformation of Rupiah currency management through these three pillars is a manifestation of Bank Indonesia’s strong commitment to maintaining the integrity and credibility of the Rupiah as legal tender, as well as a unifier and pride for the Republic of Indonesia and the Indonesian nation. Money Market Deepening: Effectiveness of Policy Transmission and Financing Bank Indonesia has accelerated money market reforms to strengthen monetary policy transmission 0501001502002503002017201820192020*2021*IDR Trillion12.447.2145.2201266Graph 35. Development of Electronic MoneySource: Bank IndonesiaDescription: * Bank Indonesia projections05,00010,00015,00020,00025,00030,00035,0002017201820192020*2021*IDR Trillion16,99821,86026,63927,03632,206Graph 36. Development of Digital BankingSource: Bank IndonesiaDescription: * Bank Indonesia projections
31BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020and to support financing for the economy. To that end, Bank Indonesia has formulated the Money Market Deepening Blueprint (Blueprint Pendalaman Pasar Uang - BPPU) 2025. The goal is to create fluid and efficient financial market conditions to support monetary stability, financial system stability and to create a conducive climate for financing national development (Scheme 3). The focus is on developing a market ecosystem that is modern with international end-to-end standards covering the 3Ps + I aspects, namely Products (instruments), Providers (and users of funds, intermediaries), and Pricing (benchmark rates and standardization), with Infrastructure (market infrastructure, regulatory framework, as well as coordination and education). This target is achieved through 3 (three) main strategies, namely: (i) Encouraging Digitalization and Strengthening of the Financial Market Infrastructure (FMI), (ii) Strengthening the Effectiveness of Monetary Policy Transmission, and (iii) Developing Sources of Economic Financing and Risk Management. Bank Indonesia focuses on the development of the money market, foreign exchange market and Islamic money market, in close coordination with the OJK that focuses on the stock market, bond market and structured product markets.BPPU 2025 is implemented through 3 (three) main initiatives to develop a modern and international standard money market. The Strategic Business Plan (SBP) for the three main initiatives will be implemented from 2020 to 2025 (Scheme 4). The first initiative is to encourage digitization and strengthening of money market infrastructure including trading venues such as the electronic trading platform (ETP), central counter party (CCP), BI-SSS, BI-RTGS, and trade repositories (TR). The second initiative is to increase the effectiveness of monetary policy transmission through the expansion of the instruments of the Repurchase Agreement (Repo), IndONIA and JIBOR, Overnight Index Swap (OIS), DNDF, and Local Currency Settlement (LCS) with a number of countries. Meanwhile, the third initiative is to develop sources of economic financing and risk management, such as long-term hedging instruments, asset securitization, Scheme 3. Money Market Deepening Blueprint (Blueprint Pendalaman Pasar Uang - BPPU) 2025Creating a liquid and eﬃcient ﬁnancial market conditionto support monetary stability, the stability of ﬁnancial system,and a conducive climate for ﬁnancing national developmentImplementing the development of the Money Market and Forex Market and Other Financial Markets through Strengthening the Elements of the Financial Market Ecosystem to increase Market CredibilityThe creation of a deep, liquid, eﬃcient, inclusive and safe ﬁnancial marketThe availability of sources to ﬁnance the national economyMoney MarketForex MarketBond MarketStock Market6 MARKETInstrumentsProviders andUsers of FundsIntermediariesMarketInfrastructureRegulatoryFrameworkBenchmark Rate &StandardizationCoordination &EducationFinancial Market EcosystemVISIONMISIONEncouraging Digitalization & Strengthening the Financial Market Infrastructure (FMI)Strengthening the Eﬀectiveness of Monetary Policy TransmissionDeveloping Sources of Economic Financing & Risk ManagementSource: Bank Indonesia
32BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020sustainable and green finance, and expansion of the retail investor base. For the successful implementation of BPPU 2025, especially with the third initiative, Bank Indonesia is coordinating closely with the Government and OJK in the Financial Market Deepening Coordination Forum (Forum Koordinasi Pendalaman Pasar Keuangan  -FK-PPK) as well as with the financial industry and with strategic partners.Empowerment of Sharia Economy and Finance, and MSMEsBank Indonesia continues to accelerate the development of Islamic economy and finance as a new source of growth for the Indonesian economy. The goal is to build a halal value chain ecosystem through three main pillars. The first pillar, the sharia economic empowerment, is directed at building halal supply chains, from small and medium scale in Islamic boarding schools (pesantren) and Muslim communities, to large scale at the industrial level. This is applied in the leading sectors of agriculture, fashion, Muslim friendly tourism, and renewable energy. The second pillar, Islamic finance, expands financial products and access both commercial - namely banking, financial markets and other financial institutions; and social finance - namely zakat, infaq / shodaqoh, and waqf. The third pillar, education and outreach, is implemented through the development of a curriculum for Islamic economy and finance, entrepreneurship, as well as the establishment of three Sharia Financial Economics Festivals (Fesyar) at the regional level, and ISEF at the national and international.Sharia financing for economic recovery has also been strengthened through improved liquidity management of sharia banks. In 2020, Bank Indonesia issued provisions for a new Sharia Interbank Money Market (Pasar Uang Antar bank Syariah - PUAS) in the form of an Interbank Sharia Fund Management Certificate (Sertifikat Pengelolaan Dana Berdasarkan Prinsip Syariah Antar bank - SiPA), with a wakalah bi al-istitsmar Scheme 4. The Three Main Initiatives of Money Market Deepening Blueprint 20253Initiativeof Money MarketDeepening Blueprint 2025Encouraging Digitization and Strengthening of The Financial Market InfrastructureTrading Venue/BI-ETPCentral CounterpartyBI-SSSSBI-RTGSTrade RepositoryIncreasing The Eﬀectiveness of Monetary Policy TransmissionRepoIndONIA dan JIBOROvernight Index SwapDNDFLCSDeveloping Sources of Economic Financing and Managing RiskLong Term Hedging InstrumentSustainability and Green FinancingRetail InvestorAsset SecuritizationSource: Bank Indonesia
33BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020Scheme 5b. FLiSBI MechanismTRANSACTION MECHANISM  “FLiSBI” BI-SSSSSHORT(BUS/UUS)3. Delivery of funds*) 4.  Refunds and cost of storage and maintenance collateral (mu'nah) **)3. SBS collateral pledge*) Value at disbursement(1st leg) = SBS nominal pledged  x (SBS Price – haircut) **)  Value at due time (2nd leg) = Value at disbursement  (1st leg)  + collateral storage and maintenance costs (mu’nah) 4. Released pledge agunan SBS5. Execution of SBS collateral1. Power of sale agreement letter (once at the beginning)2. Qardh and rahn contracts, among others: a. Transaction Value b. Period of Time c. FF Rate, or the level of cost of  storage and maintenance of  collateral (mu’nah)  d. Nominal value and type of SBS  collateral (SBSN/SukBI/SBIS)Source: Bank IndonesiaScheme 5a. PaSBI MechanismTRANSACTION MECHANISM “PaSBI”  3. Delivery of Funds (without ujrah) *)5.  Returns of funds and investment returns**) 3. SBS collateral pledge5. Released pledge of SBS collateral6.  Execution of SBS collateralOverall sharia banks/sharia business unitsBI-SSSS4. Fund management that produces a minimum return equals to the expected return rate of OMSSHORT(BUS/UUS)1. Statement letter and sales power agreement2. Wakalah bi al-istitsmar contract, among others: a. Transaction Value b. Period of Time c. The expected rate return of  the OMS d. Nominal value and type of SBS  collateral (SBSN/SukBI/SBIS)*)  1st leg Value =   SBS nominal   pledged  x (SBS   Price – haircut)**) 2nd leg Value =   1st leg Value  +   management   result (istitsmar) Source: Bank Indonesia
34BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020contract. SiPA can be traded at PUAS in three types, namely with the project being financed of securities as the underlying, or securities, or a combination of both. In addition to multiplying PUAS instruments as liquidity management for sharia banking, SiPA is also in line with Bank Indonesia Sukuk (Sukuk Bank Indonesia - SukBI) which has been issued as a monetary operation instrument with SBSN as the underlying transaction. In addition, Bank Indonesia also strengthened the sharia monetary operations by issuing new liquidity injection instruments in the form of Bank Indonesia Sharia Principles Liquidity Management (Pengelolaan Likuiditas Berdasarkan Prinsip Syariah Bank Indonesia - PaSBI) with a wakalah bi al-istitsmar contract and Bank Indonesia Sharia Based Liquidity Facility (Fasilitas Likuiditas Berdasarkan Prinsip Syariah Bank Indonesia  - FLiSBI) with a qard contract and rahn (Schemes 5a and 5b). All of these are expected to further enhance the role of Islamic banking in financing the economy. The series of Fesyar and ISEF events in 2020 will further strengthen the synergy and the progress achieved in the development of Sharia economy and finance in Indonesia. The series of Fesyar and ISEF activities include national and international webinars, business coaching and matching, workshops, international showcases, with more than 700 exhibition participants (Scheme 6). Most of the activities were aimed at accelerating sharia economy, including through the development of Islamic boarding school businesses, halal economic associations and industries, halal certification, international tourism forums, and digitalization and economic inclusion conferences. In the field of Islamic finance, activities include Islamic financial investment forums, waqf development, and a number of international conferences. These include the organization of “Financial Intermediary Day - Business Deals (Banks, Fintech, and Businesses)”, as well as “Indonesia Modest Fashion Show” by Scheme 6. 2020 Fesyar and ISEF: Indonesia, the Center of the World Sharia Economy and FinanceSYNERGY OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND SHARIA FINANCEAS A SOURCE OF INDONESIA'S NEW ECONOMYEVENTSSHARIA FORUMSMES EXHIBITIONCOMPETETIONBUSINESS COACHINGBUSINESS MATCHINGEASTREGIONJAVAREGIONSUMATRAREGIONISEF FESYAR7 August - 31 October 2020ACTIVITIESPARTICIPANTS246INTERNATIONALWEBINAR24COUNTRIES 93INTERNATIONALSHOWCASE WITH 100CONTRIBUTORS 10EXHIBITOR777431,685TOTALTRANSACTIONS5WAQAFCOMMITMENTBUSINESS COACHING-MATCHING14COMPETITIONS17VIRTUALVISITOR166,4KDESAINERSUSTAINABLEFASHION164POTENTIALBUYER87TrillionRp30.3billionRpSource: Bank Indonesia
35BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020185 designers from all over Indonesia. The ISEF series was attended by more than 430 thousand participants and resulted in a total transaction of around Rp. 5 trillion and Rp. 30.3 billion in waqf commitments. It is a great pride that an increasing number of institutions, associations, and various parties, national and international, has joined and congregated in ISEF for the acceleration of the economy and Islamic finance.We continue to enhanceour MSMEs development program through 3 (three) policy pillars, namely Corporatization, Capacity, and Financing (Scheme 7a). The MSMEs institutional aspects continue to be strengthened through corporatization, supported by strong social capital. Groups are built on the basis of mutually beneficial cooperation, directed at increasingly formal and modern institutional forms, including cooperatives, limited liability companies, and other institutional forms. MSMEs engaged in export potential businesses are supported, such as handicrafts, fabrics and fashion, food and beverages, including coffee, as well as agriculture and other local potential sectors. Integration of digital economy and finance is accelerated through a payment system infrastructure that is fast, easy, cheap, safe and reliable through MSMEs onboarding program. In addition, business cooperation between MSMEs and between MSMEs and large businesses and financial institutions are also initiated. Bank Indonesia also builds synergies with ministries, institutions, associations and communities to encourage MSMEs to graduate (Scheme 7b). This synergy is in the form of capacity building, MSME onboarding, talk shows, business matching, business coaching, and joint expos in the regions and abroad. Likewise, synergy is also build to support the National “Proudly Made in Indonesia Movement” (Gerakan Nasional Bangga Buatan Indonesia -Gernas BBI).The above synergy for the development of MSMEs is the spirit of the series of Indonesia Creative Work (Karya Kreatif Indonesia - KKI) events held by Bank Indonesia in 2020. The three 2020 KKI Scheme 7a. Indonesian MSME Development FrameworkSubsistence GroupCorporatizationCapacityFinancingMicro GroupSmall GroupEncouraging Competitive MSME's forAccelerated Inclusive Economic GrowthMedium Group1. Synergy Between Central And Regional National PoliciesMinistries / Agencies /Legislative / RegionalGovernmentsAssociation / Community /Islamic Boarding Chool Business CommunityFinancial ServicesIndustry / Investor/ PhilanthropyUniversityCompany(Supply Chain)DigitalPlatformEnd to EndTechnical AssitantMarketing AccessEase of BusinessFacilities / InfrastructureAccess to Finance2. Priority SectorsCluster Formation,Halal Value Chain EcosystemCapacity Building and Financing,ReplicationAgricultureManufacturingFisheriesTourism3. Integrated Business ModelSource: Bank Indonesia
36BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020series have the theme “Encouraging MSMEs as New Strengths of the National Economy in the Digital Age”. The 2020 KKI series 1  on 28-30 August was as a synergy between Bank Indonesia, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of Cooperatives and MSMEs, the Ministry of Industry, and the Ministry of Trade to focus on encouraging exports by MSMEs. The 2020 KKI Series 2 dated 7-9 October 2020 promoted a synergy between Bank Indonesia, the Ministry of Manpower, the National Craft Council (Dewan Kerajinan Nasional - Dekranas), the Ministry of Tourism and Creative Industries, the Ministry of Communication and Information to focus on encouraging Digital MSMEs. Lastly, the 2020 KKI 2020 on 20-22 November, that was opened by the First Lady, was focused on encouraging synergy for MSMEs as Friends of Millennials. The three 2020 KKI series events featured superior products of MSMEs that are under the guidance program of by Bank Indonesia which were displayed with leading Indonesian designers. Likewise, virtual showcase on the KKI platform nationally, as well as, physically showcases with COVID-19 protocols, at various Bank Indonesia Representative Offices were held. Workshop activities, business matching and coaching, and international showcases were also held to strengthen the existence of MSMEs as a new force for the national economy (Scheme 8).Strengthening International PolicyBank Indonesia continues to strengthen international cooperation in coordination with the Government to support economic recovery and maintain macroeconomic and financial system stability, both globally and domestically. International policy diplomacy strategies are continuously being developed, both in terms of stance as well as diplomacy strategies, enhancing cooperation, managing partner countries’ perceptions, and strengthening global surveillance, Scheme 7b. MSMEs as the New Sources of Economic GrowthEconomic and Financial Inclusion as New Sources of Economic GrowthPOLICYSYNERGYINTEGRATIONOF DIGITALECONOMYAND FINANCEPRIORITIZATIONEDUCATIONAND LITERACYSUBSISTENCEMICROMANAGEMENTAGENCYSOCIETYSMALL ANDMEDIUMBUDGET STATEPRIVATE INSTITUTIONDONORS / FOUNDATIONS /INTERNATIONAL / MULTILATERALORGANIZATIONSSOCIAL FUNDING/ ZISWAFMekaar, Filantropi (BMGF,Dompet Dhuafa), BWM,CSR, PSBICREDIT/SUBSIDIZEDFINANCINGRevolving Fund, KUR,Kreasi UlaMM, Umi, PMD (daya),Mekaar,PKBLCREDIT/COMMERCIALFINANCINGDirect Credit, Linkage Credit,Special/Sectoral Credit, P2P Lending,Crowd Funding Factory, VentureCapital, ISWAFDonorstate-ownedenterprises/corporation proﬁtstate budget/regional budget/revolving budget CommercialSOURCES OF FINANCINGChannels of Deliveryi.e NGO, Fintech,Social Institution (LAZ)Special FinancialInstitutions(Pegadaian, PNM)Village GovermentPolicy SynergyState-owned enterprises/CorporationBLU (LPDB, PIP)Bank & Non-bankﬁnancial institutionsSpecial FinancialInstitutions (LPEI)FintechProductive FinancingFinancial ActivitiesFinancial ActivitySmall is BeautifulPAYMENTSAVINGCREDITINVESTMENTINSURANCESource: Bank Indonesia
37BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020Scheme 8. 2020 KKI in Figures: MSMEs the Strength of Indonesia’s EconomyJOINT EVENTMINISTRIES/INSTITUTIONONBOARDINGEDUCATIONDEKRANAS/DEKRANASDA (NK)KADIN (WEBINAR BERSAMA)IDEA-ASOSIASI E-COMMERCE INDONESIA(EDUKASI ONBOARDING)SCAI-SPECIALITY COFFEEASSOCIATION OF INDONESIA (DIALOG KOPI)AFPI - ASOSIASI FINTECH PENDANAANBERSAMA INDONESIA (BM)DIGITAL PLATFORMALIBABA.COMBLIBLI.COMFINANCIAL INSTITUTIONBRIBANK MANDIRIBNIPNM COMMUNITIESTANGAN DIATAS COMMUNITYDESIGNER COMMUNITYBUSINESSESYUSHOGI MEDIA GROUPJUARA SNACKAFBI-19EATLAHBANDROSBUJUK RAYUBUMI KARDUSACTIVITIESPARTICIPANTSSME’s379CREATIVE WORKPERFORMANCESTALKSHOWWORKSHOPBUSINESS COACHINGBUSINESS MATCHINGMINISTRY TALKSEDUKASI ONBOARDINGJOINT EVENT DENGAN K/L:WEBINAR DAN HIGH IMPACTSEMINARJAVABALINUSA TENGGARASUMATRASULAWESINUMBER OF VISITORS60,00040,00020,0000201620172018201920204,4657,59210,90118,91164,763TOTAL TURNOVER403020100201620162016201620162.684.57.0112.3916.51BUSINESS MATCHING2001501005002019202073.4113.2Synergy Encourages MSMEsas a New Economic Force forthe Economy in the Digital EraKEMENKO MARVES (HIS)KEMENKOP DAN UKM (HIS)KEMENLU (WEBINAR BERSAMA)KEMENKEU (BC)KEMENPAREKRAF (HIS)KEMENDAG(HIS, EDUKASI ONBOARDING, BC)KEMNAKER (MT, JOINT EVENT)KEMENDIKBUD (MT)KEMENDES PDTT (MT)KEMENKOMINFO (HIS)OJK (HIS, JOINT EVENT)Source: Bank Indonesiato support the interests of Bank Indonesia and / or the Indonesian economy at the international level, including cooperation in managing the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. International and Asia regional cooperation is increasingly expanded, including in the form of International Financial Safety Net (Jaring Pengaman Keuangan Internasional  -JPKI) and Local Currency Settlement (LCS). Currently, Bank Indonesia has collaborated in the Bilateral Currency Swap Arrangement (BCSA) with China, Japan, South Korea, Australia and Singapore, as well as a Repo Agreement with the New York Fed and the BIS. Meanwhile, LCS cooperation has been established with Japan, China, Malaysia and Thailand. Institutional cooperation has also been expanded under the framework of Structured Bilateral Cooperation (SBC) with a number of central banks such as the New York fed, Japan and Central Bank of The Republic of Turkey, as well as with international institutions such as the BIS.Bank Indonesia has also played an active role in bolstering positive international perceptions, particularly rating agencies and foreign investors, on the Indonesian economy. This is done through intensive communication and engagement with rating agencies and foreign investors on a regular basis, especially the Investor Conference Call (ICC) a each monthly Board of Governors Meeting  and any strategic policies that need to be communicated. Investment and trade promotions are also carried out through the Investor Relations Unit (IRU) both nationally, regionally and globally, through Bank Indonesia representative offices in various regions, in collaboration with the Government (Central and Regional), as well as Indonesian Embassies abroad. For example, during 2020 Bank Indonesia cooperated and actively participated in the Indonesia Investment Forum (IIF) in Singapore, the Central Java Investment Business Forum (CIJBF), and the West Java Investment Summit (WJIS), all of which were held virtually. 
38BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020Bank Indonesia also continues to gain international recognition as the best central bank among emerging market countries. This is supported by increased representation of Bank Indonesia in international cooperation fora, both through membership and chairmanship, in international cooperation forums. The reputation of Bank Indonesia is also enhanced by gaining international awards from reputable international institutions, application of a number of international standards, publishing internationally acclaimed research publications and journals, as well as being reference and resource persons in various strategic international events. In 2020, Bank Indonesia was awarded as The Best Macroeconomic Regulator in the Asia Pacific Region 2020 from the Asian Banker; QRIS-the Best Payments Innovation Award from Central Banking Publication; and Asia Pacific Stevie Awards - Award for Innovation in Technology Management, Planning, and Implementation 2020 from The Stevie Awards. This international recognition was received after in 2019, Bank Indonesia was also awarded the Central Bank Governor of the Year, Asia Pacific 2019, from Global Capital and the 2019 Contact Center Award from Contact Center World.Transformation of Bank IndonesiaInternally, we continue to improve through the transformation of policies, organization and work processes, human resources (HR) and work culture, as well as digitization. This institutional transformation of Bank Indonesia was realized by strengthening the Vision, Mission, and the formulation of the 2020-2025 Strategic Business Plan (SBP), namely to realize “Bank Indonesia as the leading digital central bank in contributing significantly to the national economy and the best among Emerging Markets for Advanced Indonesia.” We will not only strengthen the response to the Bank Indonesia policy mix for economic recovery as described above, but also to support economic transformation towards an advanced Indonesia. The transformation of Bank Indonesia since May 2018 Scheme 9. Organizational Transformation Building Superior PerformanceORGANIZATIONAL TRANSFORMATIONImplementing an Excellent Performance Organizational Framework and ensuring a more eﬀective and eﬃcient work processDigitization of policy and institutional business processes to support BI digitalEnsuring the availability of resources (HR, assets and IT) to support policy transformation and institutional managementPrepare the organization, business processes, and infrastructure in the context of moving to a new IKN Optimizing the integrated role of the 4 governance functions in overseeing the formulation and implementation of policies and institutionsEnsuring BI's medium-term ﬁnancial sustainability and credibility through WTP audit opinionMaintain the legal mandate of BI in various laws and regulations.Strengthening stakeholder engagement through synergy and communicationCreating an Excellent Performance and Digital-Based OrganizationCreating a Prime and Credible Governance Source: Bank Indonesia
39BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020has been strengthened and expanded into 4 (four) main agendas, namely: (i) policy transformation, (ii) organizational transformation, (iii) human resources transformation, and (iv) digital transformation. The entire SBP 2020-2025 has been translated into 12 Strategic Programs, with targets to be achieved and main strategies to be implemented in the next 5 years. More than that, the 2020-2025 SBP has also been equipped with resource planning, including financial planning, human resources, information systems, as well as logistic assets and work facilities.We are strengthening our organizational transformation to create a digital-based superior performance organization and create prime and credible governance that is in line with the strategic direction of Bank Indonesia. The refinement of the new Bank Indonesia organization was supported by the digitization of business processes to support various business procedures, from policy formulation to institutional management (Scheme 9). Organizations with prime and credible governance are strengthened by the integration of 4 (four) governance functions (strategic management, strategic finance, strategic risk management, and strategic risk based internal audit) in overseeing the formulation and implementation of policies in core and institutional management areas. To support the policy and institutional transformation, the availability of resources (human resources, assets and information technology) has also been formulated, including more optimal logistics management and preparation for the organization, business processes and infrastructure. Organizational strengthening in the area of   institutional governance is also pursued through more accountable financial management to ensure the medium-term financial sustainability of Bank Indonesia and the achievement of an audit opinion (Wajar Tanpa Pengecualian - WTP). We continue to improve HR transformation to strengthen competent, professional, and principled leadership and employees of Bank Indonesia. Since May 2018, HR policies have been implemented in a programmed, scheduled, and transparent manner covering 4 areas, namely Planning, Fulfillment, Scheme 10. Transformation of Professional, Competent, and Principled Human ResourcesTRANSFORMATION OF HUMAN RESOURCES PLANNINGCOMPLIANCEDEVELOPMENTPRESERVATION4P1. Strengthening and perfecting    manpower planning that is in    line with the needs of the    digital era and in the context of   moving to a new IKN;2. Mapping of new capabilities &    suitability of human resources    to carry out policy and     institutional work processes in    the digital era.1. Strengthening strategy & development of competencies regarding central bank in the digital era 2. Embody BI as a leading think tank in economic policy analysis3. Optimization of technology based learning, supporting the implemen-tation of the Kampus Merdeka 4.0 & the initiation of central banking 5.01. Improvement of compliance strategies in terms of    quality & quantity that support digitalization;2. Optimization of HR analytics for employee fulﬁllment. 1. Strengthening the mindset and behavior of human  resources that support the digital era 4.0 through work  culture programs;2. Change program platform integration with other HR  management;3 Strengthening the Employee Value Proposition (EVP)Source: Bank Indonesia
40BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020Development and Maintenance of HR (Scheme 10). Human resource transformation is emphasized on quality over the quantity. HR planning has been prepared for the next 5 (five) years as the basis for HR development, both per work unit, level of position, task group (job family), and competence. Fulfillment strategies in terms of quality and quantity that support digitalization are enhanced, including specific human resources competency such as data scientists, data engineers, cyber security specialists, and project management. In the area of   human resource development, the transformation is carried out by intensively strengthening central banking competencies in the digital era through the BI Institute, and in efforts to make Bank Indonesia a leading think tank in economic policy analysis, and optimization of technology based learning. The leadership regeneration program has been organized and programmed through a strict selection of Potential Employee Groups (Kelompok Pegawai Potensial - KPP) and 4 (four) levels of Leadership Schools and will continue to be implemented consistently. The work culture program that is packaged into BI-Prestasi, BI-Inovasi, BI-Religion, and BI-Digital is implemented in an integrated manner into business processes so that it truly integrates with the implementation of Bank Indonesia’s duties.Digital transformation at Bank Indonesia is thoroughly implemented in both policy and institutional areas so as to become the leading digital central bank. The digital transformation aims to turn Bank Indonesia into a data driven institution with high analytics capability, digitalization of business processes, international standard information system service quality, as well as high data and digital literacy (Scheme 11). In order to maintain good governance, all of these digital transformations are included in the 2025 Bank Indonesia Information System Master Plan (Rencana Induk Sistem Informasi Bank Indonesia - RISIBI). Digital transformation is focused on (i) building an omni experience technology platform and technology support including cyber security and Scheme 11. Digital Transformation: Towards the Leading Digital Central BankDIGITAL TRANSFORMATIONDigital Transformation is implemented through the IS Transformation Architecture which includes;DEVELOPMENT IN INFORMATION SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATIONFRAMEWORK POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS1. Development of payment system business platforms and ﬁnancial market infrastructure2. Development of a business platform to support the digitization of policy and institutional business processesOMNI EXPERIENCEPLATFORM DEVELOPING INFORMATION SYSTEM (IS) INFRASTRUCTUREA ROBUST INFORMATION SYSTEM (IS) OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT1. Maintain service quality according to international standards and best practices2. Continuously increase the capacity of the information system 3. Strenghten cyber resilience1. Building a data center and policy information service (INDRA) and institutional (INTUERI)2. Building data analysis tools and digital citizens (such as monthly RDG usecase, integration of 4 functions, etc.)3. Leveraging data analytics to support key policy business processes1. Revitalizing DC-1 and builing DC-22. Adopting cloud technology3. Developing data and identity-based information system    security4. Modernization of End User Devices123Information ArchitectureApplication ArchitectureTechnology and Security ArchitectureSource: Bank Indonesia
41BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020networks, (ii) building an omni channel repository (data center) that includes metadata preparation and data capturing mechanisms, and (iii) encouraging policy and institutional digitization initiatives. Digitalization is done top-down, maximizing the existing information and reporting system platform, compiling massive metadata as needed, and changing the mindset to improve experience. Digital transformation is expected to provide an omni experience that further strengthens engagement internally between Bank Indonesia leaders and employees, as well as externally with partners in a seamless, fast and interactive manner.Synergize to Build Optimism for Economic Recovery: One Prerequisite, Five Principal StrategiesNational economic recovery is underway and will continue to increase in 2021 as well asin the medium term. As stated above, Bank Indonesia estimates that Indonesia’s economic growth in 2021 will reach 4.8-5.8%, supported by an increase in export performance, private and government consumption, as well as investment from both Government capital expenditures and foreign capital inflows as a positive response of the implementation of the Job Creation Act. Spatially, growth will increase in all regions, especially Java and the Sulawesi-Maluku-Papua region. Macroeconomic and financial system stability will be maintained. Inflation will be controlled within the target of 3±1% in 2021, while the Rupiah exchange rate will be stable and still have the potential to strengthen. External stability will be maintained, with a balance of payments surplus supported by a low current account deficit of around 1.0-2.0% of GDP and foreign capital inflows, both FDI and portfolio investment. Financial system stability is also getting better, with a high capital adequacy ratio, low non performing loan, and growth in deposits and credit that will increase to around 7.0-9.0% in 2021. In the medium term, we predict that Indonesia’s economic growth will continue to increase in the range of 5.5-6.1% with low inflation in the range of 1.5-3.5% and a current account deficit in the range of 1.5-2.5% of GDP in 2025. Overall, with this projected trajectory, Indonesia is predicted to become a high-income country by 2045.We need to encourage the momentum for national economic recovery by strengthening the synergy to build optimism. Synergy by all parties: The Government (Central and Regional), Bank Indonesia, Financial Services Authority (Otoritas Jasa Keuangan - OJK), Deposit Insurance Corporation (Lembaga Penjamin Simpanan - LPS), the banking and financial sector, business, academia, media, and the society. United, synergized, and working together to build optimism for economic recovery. In this regard, we are of the view that there is theneed for vaccination and discipline in applying the COVID-19 protocols as a necessary condition, as well as 5 (five) policies as sufficient conditions, namely: (i) opening of the productive and safe from COVID-19 sectors, (ii) acceleration of fiscal stimulus, (iii) boosting credit both from demand and supply sides, (iv) continuing monetary and macroprudential stimuli, and (vi) economic and financial digitization, particularly MSMEs (Scheme 12). In the synergy to build optimism for national economic recovery, Bank Indonesia is committed to strengthening the fourth policy, namely continuing monetary and macroprudential stimulus, as well as the fifth policy, namely accelerating the implementation of BSPI 2025 to encourage economic and financial digitization, especially MSMEs. God willing, we are optimistic that with the synergy of these policy steps, we can realize national economic recovery in 2021.Vaccination and the discipline of COVID-19 protocols are prerequisite conditions for national economic recovery. It needs to be emphasized again that the epicenter of the problems we are facing is the COVID-19 pandemic. Therefore, speed and success in dealing with the COVID-19 pandemic is a prerequisite so that the impact on health can be minimized, human mobility can gradually return to normal, economic activity and business conditions improve, while the impact of the spread to the 
42BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020financial and monetary sectors can be overcome. This optimism for economic recovery is what we need to create. In this regard, we fully support the Government’s efforts to order vaccines from a number of countries, including Sinovac from China, AstraZeneca from the UK, and possibly from other sources. Bank Indonesia has also committed to finance part of the cost of ordering the vaccine by purchasing and bearing the entire burden of Indonesia Government Bond (SBN) as part of the Joint Decree between the Minister of Finance and Bank Indonesia on “Burden Sharing” for Public Goods dated 7 July 2020. In this regard, it is important to remember that the vaccination process for most of the population will need time and, unlike any previous virus pandemic, strengthening antibodies to COVID-19 requires two vaccinations within a period of 6 (six) months. This means that even if vaccinations are carried out, the implementation of the COVID-19 protocols must still be carried out to prevent the second and even third waves of the COVID-19 pandemic. This is to ensure that economic recovery will continue through vaccinations and COVID-19 precautions.Opening economic sectors gradually that give large added value to growth and are relatively safe from the COVID-19 pandemic. Prioritization can start with a risk map for COVID-19 transmission in 52 (fifty-two) economic sectors compiled by the National Disaster Management Agency (Badan Nasional Penanggulangan Bencana - BNPB), with the highest priority given to sectors with the lowest risk of transmission, followed by sectors with medium or high risk where it will be necessary to implement COVID-19 protocols according to the risk level (Scheme 13). Meanwhile, prioritization based on economic impact can be prioritized on sectors that have the highest contribution to GDP and/or exports. Scheme 13 shows the results of mapping 52 (fifty-two) sectors according to their productivity and level of safety. The first priority, namely 6 (six) Scheme 12. Building Optimism: One Prerequisite, Five StrategiesSynergizing to Build Optimism for Economic RecoveryPre-COVID (Feb’20)Peak COVID (May’20)October 2020MAINTAINEDSTABILITYIMPROVINGGROWTHPREREQUISITE CONDITIONSVaccinations and Covid-19Protocol Discipline5 POLICY RESPONSE1. Opening of Productive and Safe   Sectors 2. Acceleration of Fiscal Stimulus   (budget realization)3. Credit Increment from Supply   and Demand Side4.  Monetary Stimulus and    Macroprudential Policy5. Economic and Financial    Digitalization, especially MSMENFC EXTERNALDEBT CONSTANT7.079.992.191.449.848.1433.715.0726.7614.11314.8857.754.59930.9810.362.9813.7676.615.85515.959.24CREDIT INTEREST RATEINFLATIONGOLDINFLATIONJCIYIELD SBN10EXCHANGERATEECONOMICGROWTHMONETARYSTABILITYSYSTEM STABILITYFINANCIALSource: Bank Indonesia
43BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020Scheme 13. Mapping of Priority Sectors: Productive and SafeRISK OF TRANSMISSION (BNPB)ECONOMIC IMPACT(Deviation, Growth, Multiplier Output, Labor, And Value-Added)LOW RISK– MEDIUM IMPACT• Other Financial Services• Financial Intermediary Services• Forestry and Logging• Fishery• Livestock• Coal and Lignite Mining• Ore Mining• Holticulture Plants• Plantation Corps• Government Administration, Defense, and Mandatory Social Security20.35%8MEDIUM RISK– MEDIUM IMPACT41.75%5MEDIUM RISK– HIGH IMPACT3.99%6LOW RISK– HIGH IMPACT• Information and Communication• Crops• Agricultural and Hunting Services• Insurance and Pension Funds• Financial Support Services• Land Transportation• Sea Transportation• Rail Transportation• Transportation Equipment Industry• Metal Goods Industry• Non-Metal Mineral Industry• Furniture Industry• Rubber Industry• Wood Industry• Other Manufacture Industry• Food and Beverages• Machinery Industry• Textile and Apparel Industry• Company Services• Electricity• Construction• Wholesale and Retail Trade• Gas Supply and Ice Production• Real Estate• Tobacco Processing• Chemicals, Physics, and Traditional Medicine Manufacture• Base Metal Industry• Water Supply, Waste Management, Waste and Recycling• Leather Industry• Paper Industry12.15%91ST PRIORITY• Food and Beverages Industry• Chemicals, Physics, and Traditional Medicine Manufacture• Forestry and Logging• Holticulture Plants• Plantation Corps• Ore Mining16.8%• Wood Industry• Furniture Industry• Livestock• Base Metal Industry• Crops• Agricultural and Hunting Services• Water Supply• Tobacco Processing• TPT Industry• Information and Communication• Real Estate• Metal Goods Industry• Non-Metal Mineral Industry• Leather Industry• Machinery Industry21.6%2nd PRIORITYSource: Bank Indonesiasectors that are safe and provide a large contribution to both GDP and exports include the manufacture of food products and beverage industry; manufacture of chemical, pharmaceuticals, and botanical products; forestry and logging; horticultural crops; plantation; and iron ore mining. The second priority, namely 15 (fifteen) economic sectors that are safe and make a large contribution to GDP or exports, as shown in Scheme 13. Overall these two priorities contribute around 38% of national GDP. Thus, the opening of productive and safe sectors can be focused on companies that are included in these two priorities, both to ensure the COVID-19 protocols and with a number of incentive policies from related ministries and fiscal incentives for business.A relatively large amount of fiscal stimulus is still needed to support the national economic recovery. In the 2021 State Budget, the Government has budgeted for a fiscal deficit of IDR1,006.4 trillion (5.7% of GDP) after a deficit of IDR1,039.2 trillion (6.3% of GDP) in 2020. With a total state expenditure of IDR2.750.0 trillion, Central Government expenditure is allocated at IDR1,954.5 trillion. Of this amount a large portion, amounting to IDR1,686.2 trillion (86.3%), is allocated for strategic policies in the 2021 State Budget to support the acceleration of economic recovery and economic transformation towards an Advanced Indonesia (Scheme 14). We believe that the relatively large fiscal stimulus in the 2021 APBN will be able to encourage national economic recovery, both in terms of consumption and investment. The budget allocation for continued social protection of IDR408.7 trillion will be able to support consumption growth in GDP, as in 2020, through various programs including PKH, Cash Transfer, Basic Food Cards (Kartu Sembako), and Health Insurance Contribution Beneficiaries (Penerima Bantuan Iuran Jaminan Kesehatan - PBI-JKN). On the investment side, a large increase in the allocation of capital expenditures for infrastructure development to IDR417.8 trillion, after 
44BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020Scheme 14. Strategic Policies in the 2021 State Budget2021 STATEBUDGETSTRATEGIC POLICIESSupporting economic recoveryacceleration and transformationtowards Advanced IndonesiaEDUCATION(Rp 550.0 T)Through central government spending& Transfers to Village & Village Funds;School Operational Assistance FundProgram, Village Funds for ECED,Smart Indonesia Card (SIC), TeacherAllowances, Bidik Misi / SIC-College,Indonesia Endowment Fund forEducationPriority for 2021: Family Hope Program(10 million beneﬁciary families),Cash Social Assistance (9 millionbeneﬁciary families), Basic Food Cards(20 million beneﬁciary families),National Health Insurance ContributionBeneﬁciaries (96.8 million people)HEALTH(Rp 169.7 T)SOCIAL SECURITY (Rp 408.7 T)Accelerating health recovery dueto Covid-19National health insurance reformHealth Security Preparedness Priority for 2021: anticipatingthe procurement of vaccines &vaccinations, fulﬁllment ofinfrastructure/ lab/ R&D/ PCR,contribution assistance for participantswho receive national health insurancecontributions, construction / rehabilitationof health centers & hospitals, healthoperational assistanceINFRASTRUCTURE(Rp 417.8 T)FOOD SECURITY (Rp 99.0 T)Provision of basic services(ﬂat, dam, access to sanitation,irrigation network)Increasing food production(rice, corn, soybeans, meat, etc.)Revitalizing the national foodsystemFood estate development(Central Kalimantan,South Sumatra,Papua)TOURISM(Rp 15.0 T)ICT(Rp 26.0 T)Encouraging the recovery of thetourism sector with a focus on5 super priority areas(Lake Toba, Borobudur, Mandalika,Labuan Bajo, Likupang) PPP scheme developmentOptimization of utilizing ICT tosupport and improve the quality ofpublic services (eﬃciency, convenienceand acceleration)Priority: Provision of BTS 5.053 invillage locations, providing internetaccess in 12,377 public servicelocations, national data centers, etc.Improved connectivity(roads, bridges, airports, railroads)Support for economic recoveryand continue delayed priorityprogramsContinuing social protectionGradual reform: comprehensive socialprotection based on life cycle andanticipation of aging populationImprovement of integrated socialwelfare dataPISA score improvement Strengthening Early ChildhoodEducation and Development(ECED)Improving of Teacher’s CompetenciesSource: Ministry of Financebeing lowered to IDR281.1 trillion in 2020will raise investment growth in GDP in 2021. In addition, the increase in investment in 2021 is also supported by the continuation of a number of National Strategic Projects (Proyek Strategis Nasional - PSN) and the realization of foreign investment in utilizing various facilities and incentives in the Job Creation Law.Synergy in boosting bank credit from the demand and supply side is necessary, particularly in productive and safe sectors. As stated above, the growth of bank credit in this year is estimated to reach the range of 7% - 9%. Demand for credit will increase in line with improving corporate conditions, particularly large ones, with increased sales, the ability to pay (interest coverage ratio, ICR), as well as surveys showing increased financing needs and plans for credit applications, issuance of bonds and stocks, as well as for domestic debt in the next 3 to 6 months. Credit supply will also remain conducive supported by low interest rates, abundant liquidity, improved credit requirements (lending standards), and the extension of the credit restructuring program by OJK. The problem, however, is that there is still high risk perception from the banking side and from the corporate side to start expanding, due to the high level of uncertainty due both to the COVID-19 pandemic and the process of economic recovery. Synergy in overcoming the asymmetric information in the credit crunch needs to be done by bringing together corporations, particularly in sectors that contribute to high growth and exports, with the readiness of banks to extend credit. The fourth quadrant (colored green) in Scheme 15 shows the industries that need to be continuously encouraged for growth and exports because of the highest banking readiness with increasing credit growth and large remaining credit limit (undisbursed loan). Meanwhile, the first quadrant (colored red) requires credit guarantees and interest subsidies from the Government to overcome the perception of high credit risk in banks. This kind of synergy will be even stronger when combined with vaccinations and 
45BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020Scheme 15. Boosting Credit: Demand-Supply MatchingCREDIT GROWTH MAPPING (%YTD) AND UNDISBURSED LOAN (%YTD)BY SUBSECTOR (PER AUGUST 2020) 3rd Quadrant: Credit (-) and UL (+): Lagging Credit Growth AreaDecrease in corporate credit along with increase in undisbursed loanNon ﬁnancing supportNon ﬁnancing supportGrowth SustainabilityGuarantee + Interest Subsidy4th Quadrant: Credit (+) and UL (+): Sustainable Credit Growth AreaIncrease in corporate credit and undisbursed loan2nd Quadrant: Credit (-) and UL (-): Avoided Credit Growth AreaDecrease in corporate and undisbursed loan1st Quadrant: Credit (+) and UL (-): Limited Credit Growth AreaIncrease in corporate credit along with decrease in undisbursed loanFood and Beverage IndustryChemical IndustryNon-Metallic Mineral IndustryBasic Metals IndustryMetal Products IndustryMachinery and Equipment IndustryTobacco IndustryFurniture IndustryLeather, Leather Products,and FootwearWood IndustryTextile IndustryClean Water ProvisionMetal Ore MiningReal EstatePost and TelecommunicationsForestry IndustryPlantation CropsCropsHorticultural Agriculture LivestockAgriculutralServices-100-80-60-40-20020406080100-100-80-60-40-20020406080100Credit Growth (Ytd %)UndisbursedLoan(Ytd %)11st priority subsector32nd priority subsector21st priority subsector42nd priority subsector01st priority subsector32nd priority subsector31st priority subsector52nd priority subsectorSalesRepaymentLikuiditasLeverageProﬁtabilitasOverallHighHighLowLowLowLower QualitySalesRepaymentLikuiditasLeverageProﬁtabilitasOverallHighLowLowLowLowLower QualitySalesRepaymentLikuiditasLeverageProﬁtabilitasOverallHighHighHighHighLowHigher QualitySalesRepaymentLikuiditasLeverageProﬁtabilitasOverallHighHighHighHighLowHigher QualityMedium Risk of TransmissionLow Risk of Transmission1st priority subsector2nd priority subsectorNote:There are two additional industrial subsectors, namely motor vehicles and pulp in the 4th quadrant, calculated using HS8 data.Source: Bank Indonesiaprovision of fiscal simulus such as tax incentives and ease of doing business from the Government.Bank Indonesia is committed to continuing to work together to build optimism for national economic recovery through the fourth policy, namely monetary and macroprudential stimulus, and the fifth policy, namely economic and financial digitization. Bank Indonesia will continue to direct all policy instruments to support the national economic recovery, while keeping inflation under control, maintaining stability of the Rupiah exchange rate, and supporting financial system stability. We will also continue to coordinate closely with the Government and the Financial System Stability Committee (KSSK) to strengthen the national economic recovery, while maintaining macroeconomic and financial system stability. The monetary stimulus and accommodative macroprudential policies will be continued and closely coordinated with the Government’s fiscal stimulus and OJK’s policies to support credit/financing, thereby further stimulating economic demand and growth. Payment system digitalization and money market deepening efforts will be accelerated to further encourage the digital economy and finance, including MSMEs and the Islamic finance economy, in a close synergy with the Government, KSSK, banking, fintech, the business world and the wider community. We believe that the digital economy and finance will increasingly play an important role in the recovery of the national economy. The following section describes in detail the Bank Indonesia policy mix for 2021. Bank Indonesia Policy Mix for 2021: Supporting Optimism for National Economic RecoveryThe policy mix of Bank Indonesia for 2021 is directed towards strengthening optimism for the national economic recovery while maintaining macroeconomic and financial system stability. The policy mix will be implemented through both 
46BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020Scheme 16. Bank Indonesia Policy Mix for 2021BANK INDONESIA 2021 POLICY MIX:REINFORCING ECONOMIC RECOVERY OPTIMISMSupportingPoliciesPaymentSystemMacroprudentialMoneteryExchangeRate StabilityLow InterestRateForeignPolicyEasingLiquidityPaymentSystemDigitalisationDigitalisation ofCash DistributionSharia economicsand ﬁnanceDigital MSMEs & ExportsFinancialMarket DeepeningAccommodativeMacroprudentialPolicy Source: Bank Indonesiamonetary, macroprudential, and payment system policies as well as supporting policies in MSMEs, shariaeconomy and finance, international area (Scheme 16). Monetary policy stimulus will continue up until there are signs of increasing inflationary pressure, while stability of the Rupiah exchange rate remains our priorities. The accommodative macroprudential policies will be continued to boost credit and financing for national economic recovery, while maintaining financial system stability. The digitalization of the payment system according to BSPI 2025 and the management of Rupiah currency according to BPUR 2025 continues to be accelerated to support the digital financial economy as a source of economic recovery, especially MSMEs and the retail sector. Bank Indonesia will continue to strengthen synergies with the Government, the KSSK, banks and the business world to strengthen optimism for national economic recovery.Monetary Policy DirectionMonetary policy stimulus will continue in 2021. The stability of the Rupiah exchange rate in accordance with the fundamentals and market mechanisms continues to be a major concern to ensure that it remains conducive to national economic recovery. Low interest rates and loose liquidity will be maintained until there are signs of increasing inflationary pressure. As noted, the current Bank Indonesia policy rate of 3.75% is the lowest in history. Liquidity will also remain loose to support bank lending and financial system stability. As previously stated, Bank Indonesia has implemented Quantative Easing of IDR682.0 trillion, or around 4.4% of GDP, the largest monetary stimulus among EMEs central banks. The monetary operation strategy will be pursued to support this monetary policy stance. With Bank Indonesia’s low policy 
47BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020interest rates and large liquidity easing, it is time for banks to immediately lower interest rates and increase credit for the business world. This step is a joint commitment to strengthen optimism for national economic recovery.The close coordination between the Bank Indonesia monetary stimulus and the Government’s fiscal stimulus continues to strengthen the national economic recovery. In this regard, Bank Indonesia will continue to purchase SBN from the primary market to finance the 2021 State Budget through regular auction as a non-competitive bidder, greenshoe option, or private placement in accordance with the Joint Decree between the Minister of Finance and the Governor of Bank Indonesia on 16 April 2020. The amount will be determined based on prudent fiscal and monetary policies, among others by prioritizing the Government’s plan to fulfill the 2021 State Budget financing from its own funds, foreign debt, issuance of global and domestic bonds; market capacity to absorb primary market SBN auctions; and the impact of monetary expansion from the purchase of SBN by Bank Indonesia on inflation. Meanwhile, the direct purchase of SBN by Bank Indonesia in accordance with the Joint Decree on 7 July 2020 only applies to the 2020 State Budget and will not be continued for the 2021 State Budget. The purchase of SBN by Bank Indonesia through the primary market mechanism allows the Government to focus on accelerating the realization of the APBN 2021 to accelerate national economic recovery. The impact of monetary expansion from the purchase of SBN on the primary market in 2020 and 2021 on inflation will still be considered. With the improving global financial market conditions and the high attractiveness of investment in Indonesia, it is expected that most of the issuance of SBN for financing the 2021 State Budget will be absorbed by the market and therefore will reduce the size of the purchase of SBN from the primary market by Bank Indonesia. The close synergy between fiscal stimulus and monetary stimulus is a manifestation of Bank Indonesia’s strong commitment to work with the Government to strengthen the national economic recovery, even though it has an impact on Bank Indonesia’s large balance deficit starting in 2021 and the following years. Macroprudential Policy DirectionBank Indonesia continues to strengthen synergy with the KSSK to bring together banks and business to encourage credit and financing for the national economic recovery. As stated above, the problem of low credit growth needs to be addressed jointly by the Government, Bank Indonesia, KSSK, banks and business. Initial priorities need to focus on priority sectors that are capable of providing a boost to high growth and exports, as mentioned in the first and third policies in the above national policy synergy. For these priority sectors, the Government can provide fiscal incentives as well as ease in overcoming problems in the business world such as electricity, logistics, and licensing. OJK can give its own consideration to banks that extend credit to priority sectors, either through microprudential policies or from the supervisory side. Bank Indonesia has taken and will pursue options for easing macroprudential policies that can further boost credit and financing for business. Macroprudential policy will remain accommodative to continue to encourage credit expansion and financing for the national economic recovery. As stated above, Bank Indonesia maintains a Countercyclical Buffer (CCB) ratio of 0%, a Macroprudential Intermediation Ratio (Rasio Intermediasi Makroprudensial - RIM) in the range of 84-94% with a disincentive parameter of 0%, and a Macroprudential Liquidity Buffer (Penyangga Likuiditas Makroprudensial - PLM) ratio of 6% - which can be used as collateral for repo transaction with Bank Indonesia in the event that the bank requires additional liquidity. Bank Indonesia will continue to assess the possibility of further easing a number of existing and new macroprudential policy instruments to boost credit and financing for the business sector. The transparency policy on bank interest rates will be strengthened to encourage a faster reduction 
48BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020in loan interest rates. To encourage MSMEs-based growth, Bank Indonesia will issue a Macroprudential Inclusive Financing Ratio (Rasio Pembiayaan Inklusif Makroprudensial - RPIM) policy by expanding the target and coverage of inclusive financing, incentives for banks that encourage the corporatization of MSMEs and priority sectors, as well as encouraging the securitization of MSMEs loans. Bank Indonesia macroprudential supervision and coordination with microprudential supervision by the OJK will be strengthened to ensure financial system stability is maintained. The integrated banking supervision forum between Bank Indonesia and OJK has been running well, and has even been expanded with the LPS. Regular meetings at the Deputy level are held once a month, and at the Head of Department level every two weeks. The forum discusses the latest individual banking conditions, assessment of liquidity conditions, credit quality, capital and other aspects, including its resilience from developments in financial market, monetary sector, corporation and macroeconomy. Thus, the forum can take the necessary steps according to the authority of each institution to jointly maintain financial system stability. This includes an assessment of the possibility of a solvent bank requiring PLJP / PLJPS from Bank Indonesia as well as bank restructuring efforts that OJK needs to take in coordination with the LPS.  Payment System Policy Direction Bank Indonesia continues to accelerate the digitalization of payment systems as part of the implementation of the 2025 BSPI in enhancing the role of the digital economy and finance as a source of economic recovery. As stated, since launched in May 2019, various implementation programs of BSPI 2025 have recorded rapid progress and will be improved in 2021 and in the coming years. National and regional QRIS campaigns continue to be intensified to reach 12 (twelve) million MSME merchants digitally registered nationally. The current QRIS with Merchant Presented Mode (MPM) will be expanded with Customer Presented Mode (CPM) so that it will further expand digital payment transactions according to consumer’s preferences with low costs, fast, and safe. Digital banking continues to be encouraged to expand and simplify retail financial services, both stand-alone and in collaboration with FinTechs. Innovation in digital payment transactions continues to be encouraged through Sandbox 2.0., so that it is expected to spur more start-ups, especially for the retail and MSME sectors. The electronification of social assistance, transportation sector, local governments, and municipalities financial transactions continues to be improved. The digitalization, centralized   distribution, and efficiency of the management of Rupiah currency throughout the Republic of Indonesia jurisdiction continues to be accelerated, including in the frontier, outer, and most remote (terdepan, terluar, dan terpencil - 3T) areas.Payment system regulatory reform is underway to further encourage industrial development, spur innovation, and integrate the ecosystem of digital economy and finance nationally. Regulatory reform in accordance with BSPI 2025 is directed at the establishment of an end-to-end digital economy and finance ecosystem between digital banking, Scheme 17. Digital Ecosystem: Open Banking,    FinTech, E-Commerce, Merchants, and   ConsumersFINTECHBANKE-COMMERCEMERCHANTCONSUMERTHE ROLEOF BANKINDONESIAOPEN API IMPLEMENTATIONCHEAPER PRICING SYSTEM THROUGH BI-FASTEXPANDING THE USE OF QRIS DATADATAFUNDFUNDDATAFUNDFUNDFUNDSource: Bank Indonesia
49BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020Scheme 18. Standard Open API: Interlink between   Open Banking and FinTechOPEN API STANDARD AND INTERLINKBETWEEN BANK AND FINTECHCONSULTATIVE PAPERMARCH 30th, 2020FOR PAYMENT SYSTEM SERVICESSource: Bank IndonesiaFinTech, e-commerce, merchants, and consumers. Through the restructuring of the payment system service industry within the integrated ecosystem of national digital economy and finance, the regulatory reform will also provide a clear direction and be more industry-friendly and flexible, inline with the rapid development of technological cycle (Scheme 17). As part of the formation of the above ecosystem, in addition to expanding the use of QRIS starting in 2021, important initiatives that will also be implemented are the Open API and the development of the retail payment system infrastructures. The implementation of the Open API is aimed at strengthening the interlink between open banking and FinTech so as to prevent shadow banking. Bank Indonesia published a consultative paper on the Open API in March 2020 of which is currently being developed together with the Indonesian Payment System Association (Asosiasi Sistem Pembayaran Indonesia - ASPI) representing from both banking and FinTech (Scheme 18). Through the Open API standardization, various payment transaction services can be provided by digital banking and FinTech by means of interlink and interconnection so that they can further expand and increase the volume and value of transactions as well as services to consumers more broadly, quickly, safely, and at a low cost. The development of retail and large value payment system infrastructures plays an important role in accelerating the digitalization of the national economy and finance. To reform the retail payment system infrastructures, Bank Indonesia is building BI-FAST to replace the Bank Indonesia National Clearing System (Sistem Kliring Nasional Bank Indonesia - SKNBI). BI-FAST will become a payment system infrastructure that can facilitate retail payment transactions using a variety of instruments and channels in real time and 24/7 operation, strengthened by robust security features and the use of digital identities (Scheme 19). Thus, every retail transaction can be digitally and immediately settled end-to-end, starting from QRIS at the merchant level, continue to FinTech and/or digital banking, and then promptly cleared and settled through BI-FAST system quickly, easily, cheaply, and safe. BI-FAST will begin to be implemented in 2021 for credit transfer transactions, and will then be followed by debit transfers and other transactions. Bank Indonesia is also planning to upgrade the infrastructure ofa large value payment system, Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS), with a newer generation equipped with settlement features for multi-currency transactions and enhanced security including to counter cyber attacks. In addition, Bank Indonesia will also build a Payment Data Hub, which is a public payment portal/data hub that integrates the acquisition of granular data as public goods. The availability of granular data for public payment systems can be processed and analyzed, including with AI and machine learning, for policy formulation and new products and business innovations to further accelerate the digital financial economy. Acceleration of Money Market Deepening Bank Indonesia is accelerating money market deepening in accordance with the 2025 Money Market Deepening Blueprint (Blueprint Pendalaman Pasar Uang - BPPU) to strengthen the effectiveness of monetary policy transmission and support the financing of the national economy. Therefore, the development of an efficient, safe, reliable, and 
50BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020international standard money market infrastructure is the focus of Bank Indonesia’s reform policy in 2021. The development of money markets is carried out end-to-end, from trading platforms, clearing and settlement, to the trade repository (Scheme 20a). For the trading venue, Bank Indonesia will follow up on the PBI Market Operator that was enacted in 2019 with the development of an electronic trading platform (ETP) both in the market, with the availability of a multimatching trading system on the money market in 2021, and modernization of BI-ETP for monetary operations in 2022. Likewise, following up on the PBI that we have enacted, the Central Counterparty (CCP) infrastructure development is targeted to be operational starting in 2021 (Scheme 20b). We believe that the development of ETP and CCP will increase interest rate derivative transactions, particularly interest rate swaps (IRS) and SBN repos, as well as exchange rate derivatives, particularly DNDF and foreign currency swaps. The money market infrastructure development is also integrated and interconnected with the payment system infrastructures, both BI-RTGS and BI-FAST, as well as the BI-SSSS infrastructure which will also be modernized and complied with international standards. We believe that such financial market infrastructure (FMI) will increase the transaction volume, lower interest rates, and lower transaction costs so that it is more liquid, efficient, developed, and supporting the effectiveness of monetary policy transmission and the provision of financing to the economy. The development of money market instruments will be further expanded to increase the volume, liquidity, and efficiency of transactions, including instruments for hedging. In the money market, instrument development is focused on the repurchase agreement (repo) transaction instruments, interest rate derivatives such as Overnight Index Swaps (OIS) and Interest Rate Swaps (IRS), as well as financing instruments such as Scheme 19. BI-FAST: Real Rime and 24/7 Retail Payment Infrastructure ImplementationPayment System Infrastructures that facilitate retail payment using various real time and 24/7 instruments and canals ImplementationCredit transferDevelopmentPhase 2DevelopmentConceptual designImplementationBulk, debit transferOperational HoursBanks and CustomersVarious Payment InstrumentFraud detection, AML/CFTDigital ID usage2020202120222023Source: Bank Indonesia
51BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020Scheme 20b. Roadmap for Money Market Infrastructure DevelopmentCURRENT STATEEND STATEMARKET OPERATOR1. PBI & PADG MO has been published2. Multiple MO Permit Processing2020Market Operator(Multimatching)Live 20212021202220232024BI-ETP1. Implementation of BI-ETP alternate system2. Conceptual Design BI-ETPBI-ETPLive 20222025ETP & IS ProviderApplicationProcessingThe availability ofMultimatchingSystemTR1. TR study for the direction of TR development in IndonesiaTradeRepositoryLive 2023TR StudyDocumentsDeveloping andRegulating TRRecommendationsTR AcademicManuscripts &Regulations Establishment ofTR institutionConceptualDesign BI-ETPBI-ETP SystemConstructionBI-ETP LiveSystem TestingBI-ETP BusinessRequirement DesignBI-ETP Functional andDesign SpeciﬁcationCCP1. PBI & PADG CCP has been published2. There are several candidates of CCP SBNTCCPLive 2021Publication ofPADG CCPCCP MandatoryClearing Main PointsSBNT CCP wasestablished“Development is carried out based on PFMI,best practices, and domestic market conditions”BI-SSSS1. SBN clearing agreement with PT KPEI2. System interconnection between KPEI and BI-SSSSBI-SSSSLive 2024Interconnectionbetween BI-SSSSand KPEIBI-SSSS Functionaland DesignSpeciﬁcationBI-SSSS Business Requirement DesignBI-SSSS Conceptual DesignBI-SSSS vendorprocurementBI-SSSS constructionis completedBI-SSSStesting iscompletedBI-SSSS Gen IIILiveBI-RTGS1. Full implementation of CeBM2. BI-RTGS Conceptual DesignBI-RTGSLive 2024BI-RTGS Gen IIIConceptual DesignBI-RTGS Functionaland DesignSpeciﬁcationKonstruksiBI-RTGSBI-RTGS Gen IIILiveBI-RTGS BusinessRequirement DesignBI-RTGS VendorProcurementSource: Bank IndonesiaScheme 20a. The Development of Financial Market Infrastructure Ecosystem Supporting the National Economy towards Indonesia as an Advanced Country in 2045Financial Market Development thatSupports Monetary Policy TransmissionThe Development of EconomicFinancing Resources Instruments RealSectorFinancialSectorFinancial Market InfrastructureMONEY MARKETFOREX MARKETSHARIA FINANCIALMARKETSTRUCTUREDPRODUCT MARKETBOND MARKETSTOCK MARKETTRADINGVENUECSD/SSSTRADEREPOSITORYCENTRALCOUNTERPARTYPAYMENTSYSTEMFMI environment that is safe, efﬁcient, reliable and suitable to international standardsSource: Bank Indonesia
52BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020Scheme 21. Synergy in the Development of Economic Financing InstrumentsSupporting the NationalEconomy towardsIndonesia as anAdvanced Countryin 2045ECONOMIC GROWTHFINANCIAL SYSTEM STABILITYTHE FINANCING OF INFRASTRUCTURESECURITIZATIONGREEN &SUSTAINABLEFINANCINGCONVENTIONAL &SHARIAFINANCINGINSTRUMENTS RETAIL & INSTITUTIONALINVESTORSFINANCESOURCESINTEREST RATE HEDGINGEXCHANGE RATE HEDGINGSource: Bank IndonesiaNegotiable Certificate Deposits (NCD), Commercial Securities (Surat Berharga Komersial - SBK), Asset Backed Securities (ABS), and retail money market instruments. In the FXmarket, instrument development is focused on exchange rate derivative instruments such as Domestic Non-Deliverable Forward (DNDF), Cross Currency Swap (CCS), and Local Currency Settlement (LCS). The development of the LCS is integrated with cooperation agreements with a number of countries, including China, Japan, Malaysia and Thailand, so that it will not only deepen the domestic money market but also increase the use of local currencies for trade and investment among countries in Asia. This step is also a joint effort in the Asian region to reduce dependence on the US dollar currency and support the stability of the Rupiah exchange rate. The development of money market instruments and infrastructure is also directed at supporting financing for the economy. In this regard, policies are directed at 4 (four) main areas (Scheme 21). First, encouraging the development of alternative sources of financing through innovative instruments such as asset securitization, ABS, green and sustainable financing, and hedging instruments for risk mitigation. Second, encouraging the use of digital technology in developing financing through digital platforms in issuance, offerings to investors, and capacity building for both wholesale instruments, such as DINFRA and DIRE, as well as for retail investors. Third, supporting financial literacy education and development of the investor base through the development, socialization and education of retail financial instruments in collaboration with the financial industry (FinTech, digital banking, and other digital platforms) as well as with educational institutions, financial market associations, and digital media. Fourth, strengthen the coordination of financial market development between Bank Indonesia, OJK, and the Ministry of Finance through synergy and coordination in the Forum on Development Financing by means of Financial Market (Forum Koordinasi 
53BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020Pembiayaan Pembangunan melalui Pasar Keuangan - FK-PPPK), including harmonizing regulations on macroprudential, microprudential and taxation policies.MSMEs Policy and Sharia Economy and Finance Bank Indonesia continues to expand its MSME development program, both under its own guidance and in collaboration with the Government and other partners at central and regional levels. The development of MSMEs is carried out through corporatization, capacity building, and financing to increase the economic scale of MSMEs, especially in priority sectors so that they can increase the contribution of MSMEs to GDP and encourage MSMEs to “Go Export” and “Go Digital”. The corporatization program is aimed at encouraging MSMEs to enter the digital ecosystem by facilitating easy licensing, forming productive clusters, and digital infrastructure for MSMEs. The capacity building program is aimed at improving the capacity of MSMEs end to end; starting from product development, management and financial training programs, to preparing market access, through the UMKM on Boarding Program (e-payment, e-commerce, and e-financing). Meanwhile, the financing program was pursued through the implementation of provisions regarding the achievement of MSME credit fulfillment for banks and non-banks, as well as expanding MSME access in empowering subsidized credit / KUR to accelerate the integration of economic inclusion and digital finance nationally. The implementation of Indonesian Creative Works (Karya Kreatif Indonesia - KKI) which is increasingly successful in elevating UMKM “Go Export” and “Go Digital” will be further enhanced in 2021, as well as strengthening synergies with the Government in the success of the Proudly of Indonesian Product National Movement (Gerakan Nasional Bangga Buatan Indonesia - GerNas BBI).The important role of Bank Indonesia in the development of the sharia economy and finance will continue to be enhanced as a new source of growth for the Indonesian economy as well as to become a reliable global player. To that end, Bank Indonesia continues to strengthen synergies with relevant parties, both within the Sharia Financial Economy National Committee (Komite Nasional Ekonomi Keuangan Syariah - KNEKS) as well as Islamic boarding schools, business associations, banks, as well as sharia scholars, academics and the wider community. The acceleration of the implementation of the halal value chain ecosystem (local and global halal value chain) continues to be improved, including with the aspects of actors and economic sectors, institutions, and supporting infrastructure. Sharia economic empowerment is focused on priority sectors, namely agriculture for halal food, fashion, Muslim friendly tourism, and renewable energy. Islamic finance is expanded both in the financial sector and the mobilization of productive ZISWAF. This includes the development of Islamic financial instruments, such as foreign exchange instruments and long-term financing instruments, as well as the development of Islamic social finance and its integration with commercial finance as an alternative to financing. The campaign for Islamic economic and financial literacy continues to be expanded through the holding of three Sharia Financial Economic Festivals (Festival Ekonomi Keuangan Syariah - Fesyar) at the regional level, and the ISEF on a national and international scale.International Policy On international policy, we will continue to be active in various international forums to further increase investment and trade in support of the national economic recovery. In synergy with the Government and various parties, Bank Indonesia continues to increase positive perceptions of investors and rating agencies through more proactive 
54BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020That is all, and thank youWassalamualaikum Warahmatullahi Wabarakatuh,Jakarta, 3 December 2020Perry WarjiyoGovernor of Bank Indonesiaengagement activities. We also continue to play an important role in facilitating trade and investment promotion in priority sectors through the support of the Investor Relations Unit (IRU) at the regional, national, and international levels. In this regard, a number of policies were strengthened, including mapping project availability according to investor preferences and organizing joint promotional activities both abroad and domestically for products / projects in priority sectors. In particular, we need to strengthen collaborated actions in the use of the FTA / CEPA and Local Currency Settlement (LCS) agreements to optimize the foreign trade and investment. Foreign cooperation is also continuously strengthened with a number of central banks and international institutions.Moving Forward with Optimism Indonesia’s economic prospects in 2021 will improve, and Bank Indonesia will continue to strengthen synergies to build optimism for economic recovery. Growth is projected to be higher and macroeconomic and financial system stability to be maintained. Mobility and economic activities are expected to increase with vaccination and discipline in implementing COVID-19 protocols. Bank Indonesia will strengthen synergies with the Government (Central and Regional), KSSK, banks, and the business sector in building optimism for the national economic recovery. Policy synergies are also relentlessly build to support the opening of productive and safe sectors, relatively large fiscal stimulus, increased credit and financing, continued monetary and macro prudential stimuli, and rapidly developing digital economy and finance. We will also continue to work together with the DPR, especially Commission XI, the banking and financial sectors, the businesses sector, scholars, the media, and relevant parties.With this synergy, Indonesia has shown demonstrated and momentum for economic recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic. Also with synergy, Indonesia’s economic prospects will be better in the future, supported by a national economic policy mix that is closely coordinated, with economic transformation and the development of digital economy and finance innovation. This is toward an increasingly prosperous Advanced Indonesia.
55BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020
56BANK INDONESIA’SANNUAL MEETING 2020
Yaron Amir: Remarks - Eli Hurvitz Conference on Economy andSociety 2020Remarks by Mr Yaron Amir, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the Eli Hurvitz Conference onEconomy and Society 2020, virtual, 14 December 2020.*   *   *Hello to all those watching the conference—I am pleased to be here today taking part in thisimportant professional discussion, which the Eli Hurvitz conference provides each year.The past year was characterized by a health crisis that led to an economic crisis of historicproportions, one that crossed borders and continents. The lockdowns imposed in response tothe broad outbreak of infection led to a sharp decline in economic activity. We are pleased thatthe recovery from the second lockdown has been more rapid than the recovery from the firstone, and thus it may be concluded that it is important to continue and open the economy and tomaximize economic activity, but in a responsible manner.The crisis also caused a strong negative impact on the labor market—an impact that included allpopulation levels and geographic areas. The government’s role in the handling of and exit fromthe crisis is extensive and incredibly important, and hence there is great importance to the 2021budget, which is the economic work plan of the government. I will expand on the importancefurther on in my remarks. Monetary policy has also had an important role in the crisis so far, andthrough it the Bank of Israel worked in a range of ways to minimize as much as possible thenegative impact on Israel’s economy, and we are working all the time on steps and programsthat will lead the economy back to a path of growth, employment and productivity, throughutilizing the opportunities inherent in the crisis.I will begin with a short survey of the Israeli economy as it headed into the crisis.It should be recalled that Israel entered the crisis in a relatively good state: solid growth, a tightlabor market, a current account surplus, and a debt to GDP ratio that had declined toapproximately 60 percent, due as well to the responsible budgetary conduct by Israeligovernments in most years—a fact I’ve defined in the past as a strategic asset.Israel was adversely impacted by the crisis relatively less than other economies worldwide. Theoutbreak of the crisis and the imposing of limitations led to a negative economic impact, butcompared internationally the adverse impact to GDP was lower. The data throughout thesummer were better than we had thought, and show that there should be a continuation of apolicy to minimize the adverse impact on businesses that drive growth and employment, and toopen the economy in a responsible manner alongside maintaining low morbidity.We are seeing that the adverse impact from the second lockdown to date has been lower thanthe first lockdown, and the economic recovery from it has been relatively rapid.  The Bank of Israel Research Department presents a forecast with two macroeconomicscenarios, depending on the development of the infection rate in Israel. These were built basedon information that we had in October. One scenario is the “control scenario”, which includes thesecond lockdown with exit paths as we currently see them—gradually, without further significantlimitations through the second quarter of 2021.The “low control” scenario refers to a longer and more severe lockdown as well as additionalwaves of morbidity around December–January and even another around March. The gapbetween the scenarios is very wide, with the differences between the two scenarios mostly beingreflected in 2021. 1 / 6BIS central bankers' speeches
In order to understand the meaning of the control scenario relative to the point we should havebeen if not for the coronavirus, under the control scenario there is a GDP gap of 5 percent andunder the low control scenario the gap is almost 10 percent. These are tremendous differences—GDP of billions of shekels that is not being achieved by the Israeli economy.Obviously, we also have some good news—not only regarding third quarter activity but also theexpected arrival of the vaccine. However, we have to understand that even with the vaccine and ifeverything occurs as it should, we will be with the coronavirus until at least the end of the firstquarter of 2021, if not into the second quarter of 2021. Therefore, the two scenarios in theforecast are still relevant.When we examine the forecasts regarding unemployment and the labor market, we cansee evidence that the labor market will take quite some time to return to its strength, andthat is also when the economy will recover. Unemployment rates are very high. In the lowcontrol scenario, the broad unemployment rate is liable to stabilize around 14 percent, whileunder the control scenario the broad unemployment rate could decline to around 8 percent.I would like to focus on two main subjects—the labor market and the activity of small and microbusinesses.The labor market and the activity of small and micro businesses are particularly relevant toeconomic recovery—economic activity returned to rapid activity after the second lockdown, butthe labor market is recovering more slowly.We can look at 3 concepts – standard unemployment, which represents the unemployed; theunemployed and those on unpaid leave; and the unemployed, those on unpaid leave, and thosewho’ve reported that they’ve already stopped seeking work due to the coronavirus. This is thedefinition of the concept of broad unemployment. The trend line in the past month is slower thanthe trend of return to work in the first lockdown, it gets stronger gradually and more slowly andstabilizes in the middle of November at an unemployment rate of approximately 14.5 percent.This raises the question, do we have here the signs of structural unemployment? Reasons forthis can be that businesses that closed or were suspended during the crisis will not reopen, oralternatively employers found ways to increase efficiency in their labor force. Alternatively, it couldbe that the uncertainty creates a temporary concern among employers to recruit workers at thistime.An additional marker for the concern of structural unemployment is the stabilization inthe number of those unemployed for four months already at around 200,000 people.These data raise the concern that for those unemployed people it will be particularlydifficult to return to the employment circle. It is important to remember that the longerworkers are detached from work, their human capital erodes, and the ability to find workbecomes more difficult.We can also see an adverse impact on employment relative to wages. Decision makers,supported by the Bank of Israel, minimized the lockdowns’ limitations in industries in which therisk of infection is low and the contribution to GDP and employment are high. Thus, the fact thatthey continued to work reduced the adverse impact on the economy overall.This reflects the world of high tech, finance, and areas that are amenable to technology,digitization. In contrast, the cost of this is that inequality increased. The strong gotstronger and the weak became weaker. We can see that low wage earners were morenegatively impacted by the crisis. Entire areas of business, in which wages are not highto begin with, such as culture, art, leisure, trade and micro businesses, were the mostnegatively impacted. 2 / 6BIS central bankers' speeches
We have to take care that the first-mentioned industries continue to grow, but at thesame time we have to assist those areas that I noted in order to allow economic recoveryand broad employment. The increase in inequality will create a notable adverse impacton the resilience of Israeli society, which has negative influences on the economy, andcertainly on society.I see and hear publications that those with the main adverse impacts are youth andstudents. In actuality, the reality is more complicated. The coronavirus of unemploymentnegatively impacted the entire economy! It did so without distinguishing between age,geographic location, the self-employed, wage earners, women, men, Arabs, ultra-Orthodox, and essentially everyone. I see in this a very important issue, from theeconomic as well as the social perspectives. Let me give 2 examples on which to focus:The population aged 55 and older still have 10–15 years of work ahead, and aconsiderable percentage of them have not yet returned to the labor market. It should beremembered that this is a population for whom it is often the peak of their lives and thepeak of their careers. There is a real concern that without government assistance intraining they will not be able to return to the labor market in the years remaining in theircareer. We are liable to lose here 15 years of work and productivity of tens of thousandsof workers.Another point worth remembering is that unemployment has reached the center of thecountry, and can be seen today from Hadera to Gadera, an area that was less exposed tounemployment—the middle of the country, which contains 41 percent of Israel’spopulation, today contains 55 percent of the unemployed in Israel.Therefore it is important to us, that beyond holding training, we should increase the flexibility ofthe ability to return to the labor market. The mechanism for that exists today, and it should bemaintained and even developed further. Thus, for example, an employee who wants to, and can,return to work on a part-time basis will be able to collect partial unemployment benefits. Theworker’s economic status will improve and the burden on the government and the budget willdecline.It is clear to us that there are more than a few employers who will not immediately return to 100percent activity and these abilities to increase flexibility are very important. In addition, it is alsoimportant to stick to a model of maintaining employment, which has already been discussed alot, and with it to increase the ability to incentivize employers to retain employees.There is a concern that even after the vaccine we will remain for some time with a considerableamount of uncertainty in the labor market, and it is not impossible that demand for workers willstill be low. The range of these steps and the focus on the populations that need assistance willhelp to reduce that uncertainty and the “new normal” that will be created in the labor market afterthe coronavirus event will contain as little as possible structural unemployment.Further to this, I would like to shine the spotlight on the business owners, those who of coursereflect the demand for workers. There are 2 real time surveys by the Central Bureau of Statisticsin August and October, in which businesses of various sizes were asked, “How long can youcontinue activities if the current situation continues”? The business owners estimate that shouldthe limitations be expanded, such as the possibility of entering a third lockdown, the adverseimpact they expect will increase.Thus, for example, we can see that in August, 80 percent of large businesses claimed that theycan exist more than half a year, while in October the figure declined to 54 percent. Due to thesecond lockdown, business owners became more pessimistic regarding their ability to survive. 3 / 6BIS central bankers' speeches
I will now expand on fiscal policy, the government debt, the importance of the 2021 budget andthe utilization of the crisis to increase the level of productivity and to develop the financial world.I want to go back and spend some time on the issue of the deficit and the debt to GDP ratio, andthe importance of keeping them at a controllable level. The fact is that the Israeli economy wentinto the crisis with the deficit and the debt to GDP ratio relatively low.Now as well these figures are low in international comparison, which is an important asset forIsrael’s economy.The reason for this is that financial markets and international institutions have confidence in theIsraeli economy, as rating agency S&P noted when it confirmed Israel’s credit rating, and as IMFeconomists wrote in their recent survey.However, the decline the debt to GDP ratio in the past 20 years derived not only from fiscalrestraint steps but also from other factors that there is no guarantee will be on our side in thefuture when we want to lower the debt to GDP ratio.These factors include the fact that over those years, the GDP deflator increased faster than theCPI used to calculate the debt, export prices increased more than import prices, and there was abig redemption of public debt to the government.The combination of these factors helped “pull” the debt to GDP ratio downward, and as they arenot permanent, they may even balance upward over the long term.However, it is very important to understand that the rating is not a given, and we should take noteof the points raised in that S&P report, in which they point out that there is a possibility thatIsrael’s good rating will decrease should the economic crisis extend longer than expected, or ifthere is a lack of fiscal convergence in the medium term and instability to a debt to GDP ratioaround 80 percent.I would like to emphasize the importance of maintaining the credit rating. The economicsignificance is that the State of Israel can issue debt at more convenient prices, and thegovernment’s interest expenditures are smaller, so that more resources can be allocated togrowth drivers and assistance to citizens.As there is considerable uncertainty regarding the macroeconomic environment, we can see alarge difference between the forecast for the deficit and the debt to GDP ratio under scenarios inwhich there is a lot or a little control of morbidity.Therefore, in order to reduce the uncertainty, a reduction is required in the expenditure side, “thenumerator”, which can be controlled more effectively than the denominator side—the size ofGDP. We can see the change in the debt to GDP ratio under the 2 scenarios of control and lowcontrol over morbidity. As noted, it is very important that this ratio doesn’t run wild.This will require tight fiscal restraint. We should also note that there won’t be a rapidconvergence to even a structural-deficit target of 2.5 percent.In contrast, this ratio will decline to the extent that we will be able to improve productivity andgrowth of GDP—something that naturally will improve the standard of living in the economy.Therefore, we need to put into the 2021 budget already growth accelerators to exit the crisis, andto invest in issues that support productivity, such as human capital, decreasing bureaucracy andregulation and increasing the efficiency in the public sector, in physical capital and infrastructures—details on the implementation of these items can be found in the Bank of Israel’s ProductivityReport. 4 / 6BIS central bankers' speeches
It is very important to approve the budget for 2021 very soon, it is the government’s economicwork plan. The interim budget through which the government is currently operating is causing thegovernment to operate under a budget based on the budget for 2019, which was approved during2018, and that is about 5.5 percent lower, in real terms, than the situation in which budgets wouldbe approved based on the expenditure limitation.This is liable to lead to fiscal restraint for reasons that are not wanted and at a time that is notappropriate. This impacts on the activities of government ministries as well as on a range ofentities and organizations. An approved budget enables them to act with a work plan based on abudget that provides a response to the needs of the population.In addition, since the 2019 budget was passed, the economy has gone through manyfluctuations, and the budget needs to be aligned with needs that have changed, and a renewedallocation of part of the budget by shifting budget sources among various goals and programs ofthe government.A rapid contraction of the structural deficit and the debt to GDP ratio, through increasing tax ratesand moderating expenditures, is likely to impact adversely the Israeli economy’s exit from thecrisis.Therefore, it is recommended to approve the budget for 2021 very soon, while converging to themultiyear fiscal frameworks that will stabilize the debt to GDP ratio and at the same time willallow flexibility due to the considerable uncertainty. To that end the following principles should beadopted: 1.      Regular expenditures in 2021 will be based on the amount of total expenditure, andwill be separated from the direct expenditures deriving from dealing with the coronavirus.2.      Due to the high uncertainty, for 2021 the deficit will be consequential but the tax ratewill not be reduced without a parallel decrease in expenditures.3.      Adjustments will not be made for the coming years, but decisions that increasethem will be blocked.4.      The multiyear budget framework for years after 2021 will be determined whenapproving the 2022 budget.5.      Instead of the existing expenditure limitation, the 2022 budget will anchor an outlinefor reducing the debt via an “adjusted expenditure” ceiling. Let’s switch now to speak about the foreign exchange market, which in recent weeks has beenat the core of the economic discourse, and I will try to review it at this opportunity. I will speaknow about the reasons that led to the strengthening of the shekel, the steps that the Bank hastaken so far, and what the policy terms are, looking ahead.The dollar weakness is a global phenomenon, and the dollar has weakened against mostcountries worldwide. The shekel hasn’t particularly stood out in its strength against the dollar,among other things due to the Bank of Israel’s policy in the foreign exchange market.Accordingly, the strength of the effective exchange rate, and of the shekel vis-à-vis the euro, aremore moderate than against the dollar.There are additional reasons for the strength of the shekel. The current account surplus grewthis year, due to transitory reasons related to the crisis—the marked contraction in the quantity ofimports and a decline in energy prices. The reasons that led to the strength of the shekel aremostly good ones—years of current account surplus, and the capital flows into the economy areextensive investments by the leading technology companies in the world in the Israeli economy, 5 / 6BIS central bankers' speeches
and large institutional investors around the world increased the scope of their holdings in Israeligovernment bonds due to Israel joining the WGBI index.In addition, the coronavirus adversely impacted imports, while exports continued to grow, whichcombined with the effect of the balance of trade in recent years. Excluding the item for tourismservices, which due to the circumstances of the crisis particularly adversely impacted it. Exportperformance throughout the crisis has been notably good, relative to private consumption andinvestments, and especially in view of the decline in world trade.Despite the good cumulative performance of exports to date, a rapid appreciation is liable tonegatively impact performance of exports and subsequently of industries that produce importsubstitutes, and to weigh on the economy’s recovery from the crisis. This concern becomesstronger in view of the state of world trade and the growth in the percentage of companies thatare reporting a shortage in orders for imports.Foreign exchange purchases by the Bank of Israel, which were $17 billion through November ofthis year, acted against the foreign currency flows noted above, moderated the pace ofappreciation, so that the exchange rate has not markedly strengthened beyond what is in linewith the dynamic window derived from fundamental forces. Under the current circumstance,the level of foreign exchange reserves is not a limitation on the policy of purchasingforeign exchange.The Bank of Israel intends to continue the policy in the foreign exchange market in 2021as well and to purchase foreign exchange at quantities required in order to prevent thecontinued appreciation of the shekel beyond what is derived from the economy’sfundamental data.The foreign exchange purchase policy is one pillar in the Bank of Israel’s monetary policy, andjoins a broad set of steps taken in the crisis. These include ensuring a low interest rate,government and corporate bond purchases, and the special program to increase the supply ofcredit to small businesses and the deferral of loans.All these together provide broad support to the business sector with all its facets and we willcontinue to do so to the extent necessary.Thank you! 6 / 6BIS central bankers' speeches
  CENTRAL BANK OF KENYA  LAUNCH OF THE PERSONS WITH DISABILITY DIGITAL ACCESSIBILITY REPORT  Remarks by Dr. Patrick Njoroge Governor, Central Bank of Kenya Wednesday, December 2, 2020  As Prepared for Delivery  Good morning, Good afternoon, Good evening! I am delighted to join you today for the launch of the Persons with Disability Digital Access Report. Let me express my appreciation to the Kenya Bankers Association (KBA) for the invite. The timing of this event is indeed apt coming on the eve of the International Day of Disabled Persons which aims to promote an understanding of disability issues and mobilize support for the dignity, rights and well-being of persons with disabilities. According to the World Bank1, 15 percent of the world population experience some form of disability with high prevalence in the developing countries. In Kenya, as per the 2019 census statistics, 2.2 percent of Kenyans are living with some form of disability. Of this population, only 0.5 percent are included within the financial system.2 This is a significant level of financial exclusion that needs to be urgently addressed. On a broader front, the United Nations (UN) 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development that seeks to ensure shared prosperity for all global citizens is disability inclusive. The Agenda that will be realized through the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) aspires that the disabled will not be left behind in shared prosperity. In particular, the SDGs call for nations to work towards including the disabled in education, employment and more broadly ensuring their social, economic and political inclusion.                                                               1 https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/disability 2 WHO World Report on Disability (2011) http://www.handicap-international.org/uploads/media/goodpractices-GB-2coul.PDF 
2  Turning to the Kenyan banking sector, the Central Bank of Kenya (CBK) has set a vision of a banking sector that works for and with Kenyans. The vision is operationalized through the Kenya Banking Sector Charter issued in February 2019. The charter is anchored on four pillars: customer centricity, risk based pricing, transparency, and ethical banking. While all the four pillars strive towards all Kenyans being included in the banking sector, two of them are particularly pertinent for our discussions today—in our view they encompass the expectations with regard to the inclusion in the banking sector of persons with disabilities. The first is customer centricity. Banks should ensure that their products and services are tailored to the needs of their customers. This applies to all segments of their customers of whom the disabled are an important component. Banks must therefore clearly understand the needs of the disabled as they design products and services for them. More importantly is how the disabled access these products and services. Advances in technology and innovations present us with opportunities to ensure convenient ‘anytime anywhere’ services on digital platforms. However, physical channels still remain important and every effort must be made to make brick-and-mortar facilities accessible by the disabled. The second pillar is ethical banking, which is about doing the right thing. This is encapsulated in the shift towards sustainability aptly captured in the 3Ps acronym, People, Purpose and Planet. The Kenyan banking sector to its merit established the Sustainable Finance Initiative in 2015. Some of our banks have signed up to global sustainability initiatives most notably, the UN Principles for Responsible Banking unveiled on the margins of the UN General Assembly in September 2019. As the Kenyan banking sector walks the 3Ps path, it must carry along the disabled, an integral part of our society. On our part as the Central Bank, we are also working through our mandate to the Kenyan populace to ensure that the disabled are not left behind. Most notably, the new generation notes issued in June 2019 incorporated features to enable ease of use by the visually impaired. These include use of large prints, tactile bands to identify the denomination and size differentiation of the various denominations of the notes. These features were incorporated based on feedback from the visually impaired. While these are significant milestones, we are still on a journey listening to all Kenyans to ensure they are able to use the notes and coins we issue.  
3  As I draw to a close, today’s event should be the beginning of a journey for Kenya’s banking sector in walking more closely with the disabled. I am sure that this will not just be another webinar, but we shall all be challenged to take action and make a difference to society. We cannot prosper as a society if any of us is left behind. I therefore challenge the Kenyan banking sector to walk the talk and truly serve our disabled compatriots. Let us be challenged to design suitable products and services for them and ensure our premises and physical channels are easily accessible to them. At this time next year, we should celebrate today as the beginning of a year of tremendous progress in incorporating the disabled in the Kenyan banking sector. I wish you fruitful deliberations and look forward to the outcomes of this event.  Thank you! 
  CENTRAL BANK OF KENYA  AFRO-ASIA FINTECH FESTIVAL NAIROBI ONLINE CITY In partnership with the 2020 Singapore Fintech Festival  Opening Remarks by Dr. Patrick Njoroge Governor, Central Bank of Kenya December 7, 2020  As Prepared for Delivery  Good Morning, Good Afternoon, Good evening! It is a great honour for the Central Bank of Kenya (CBK) to host the Nairobi Online City, an iteration of the Afro-Asia Fintech Festival (AAFF) launched in 2019. The AAFF Nairobi Online City is part of the 2020 Singapore Fintech Festival (SFF). CBK is therefore honoured to join the global community of Central Banks, governments, financial institutions, fintechs, and other players to deliberate and reflect on the theme of “People and Talent: Harnessing Collaboration in Pursuit of Resilience and Growth Post COVID-19.’’  At the outset, let me express CBK’s gratitude to the Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS) for allowing CBK and almost 40 other cities to partner in expanding the reach of the virtual 2020 SFF. I also appreciate all our partners and service providers who have worked with us to make this event a reality.   2020 has been an exceptional year dominated by the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic. Our lives and livelihoods have dramatically changed as Governments, businesses and citizens globally sought to contain the pandemic. There have been significant adverse health and economic effects that have rolled back global progress in efforts towards the shared prosperity of our citizens. As significant progress begins to be made on the medical front in developing vaccines and therapeutic drugs, the conversation must shift to building back better. 
2  While the pandemic has been devastating, it has also accelerated digitalization that should stand us in good stead as we transition to the post COVID-19 recovery. Digital platforms have been the lifelines in accessing essential financial, health, education, medical, entertainment and other services. We must embed these gains and leverage them as we pursue global resilience and growth post COVID-19. Towards this end, we shall over the next few days, deliberate on various strategies. Let me highlight three broad themes to set the stage.  First, is restoring Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs). SMEs are the engines of economies globally and more particularly in Africa. However, they have borne the brunt of COVID-19 containment measures including movement restrictions and curfews. Their businesses have been disrupted causing adverse impact on lives and livelihoods. We will need to accelerate digital ecosystems that will enable the SMEs to reconnect with their customers, markets and access the much needed finance for recovery.   I therefore look forward to the panel discussions later today on reinventing SMEs through digital ecosystems that will provide an African perspective. I am sure that this will be supplemented by the global perspectives from the United Nations Development Program on Wednesday on inclusive digital finance for SMEs. However, we must remember that it is not just about digital platforms or finance, we also need to consider how to retool the skills and business models of SMEs as they pivot to the post  COVID-19 era.  Second, is partnerships and collaborations. As we move forward, agility will be imperative particularly for incumbent institutions as they respond to changing customer preferences for anytime anywhere services. Even before the pandemic, incumbent banks and telecommunication companies had started to develop partnerships with agile fintech companies. This trend will have to be accelerated in a safe and sustainable manner as we build back.   We will this week hear from eminent leaders in the banking, telecommunication and technology sectors on their partnership and collaboration strategies. More interestingly, we will also hear from fintechs and start-ups on their journeys through the pandemic and the value proposition that they bring to building an inclusive ecosystem.  
3  Third, is sustainable finance. At the heart of post COVID-19 recovery will be a renewed focus on People, Purpose and Planet (3Ps). For resilience, finance must take into account environmental, social and governance considerations. This is an area that the Kenyan banking sector is setting the pace on. In 2015, Kenyan banks established the Sustainable Finance Initiative to embed sustainability in their values and processes. It is therefore befitting that some of the leading Kenyan banks in these areas will be sharing their sustainable finance experiences and strategies going forward later this week.  As we explore the opportunities of digitalization, we must remain seized of the risks. In particular, cybersecurity and data governance pose a risk particularly for the increased number of our citizens who are accessing digital systems for the first time. We must therefore ensure that we reflect on how to build cyber resilience in the new normal. Equally important is the protection of data on digital platforms that increasingly transcend national borders. We need to urgently explore ways of ensuring our citizens are digitally literate and all participants in the digital ecosystem exercise responsible digital leadership and governance.  The overarching theme in our discussions all through this week must be about People. We must constantly ask ourselves, what are their needs? How does technology and innovation meet these needs? Most importantly, how do we place People at the centre?     In closing, let me once again reiterate what a privilege it is for CBK to be hosting you. The journey of building back better cannot be undertaken alone. Platforms such as the Nairobi Online City provide opportunities for many more of us to come together. Let us walk together, as we collectively work towards restoring the lives, livelihoods and dignity of our citizens.  It is now my distinct honour and pleasure to declare the Afro-Asia Fintech Festival Nairobi Online City officially opened. I wish you all a fruitful virtual journey as you traverse the World over the next three days.  Thank you! 
Elvira Nabiullina: Review of recent inflation developments in Russiaand economic outlookStatement by Ms Elvira Nabiullina, Governor of the Bank of Russia, in the follow-up to the Boardof Directors meeting, Moscow, 18 December 2020.*   *   *Today, we have kept our key rate at the level of 4.25% per annum.As regards our view of the economic situation, there have been no significant changes sinceOctober’s meeting of the Board of Directors. However, inflation is driven by diverse factors.The Board of Directors now does not consider that the ratio of proinflationary and disinflationaryfactors and risks is clearly shifted towards disinflationary ones, as has been estimated earlier.I would like to dwell on the aspects we were taking into account when making our decision today.Firstly, current annual inflation notably exceeds the path assumed in our October’sforecast. Inflation is expected to be in the range of 4.6–4.9% as of the end of 2020. Price growthhas accelerated due to a number of factors, including the situation in individual food markets.Prices have become more volatile in these markets primarily because of the rise in global foodprices and the weaker ruble.Exchange rate movements are also affecting non-food prices. According to our estimates, pricesare driven by the pass-through of not only the ruble’s weakening in autumn, but also its changessince spring 2020. In spring, manufacturers and retailers could defer the pass-throughof the weaker ruble to prices amid subdued demand and inventories accumulated earlierat previous input prices. Moreover, costs are pushing inflation upwards for other reasons as well,namely a shortage of manpower in certain industries, expenses to ensure compliance withadditional sanitary and epidemiological rules, and possible disruptions in suppliesdue to the aggravation of the pandemic situation.Of course, the acceleration of current inflation itself should not significantly impact our monetarypolicy, but there are signs suggesting that proinflationary trends may become longer-lasting. Thisis evidenced by a material rise in households’ and businesses’ inflation expectations.Increased inflation expectations may induce secondary effects. This is another factor whichwe took into account.There are signs that secondary effects have already started to manifest themselves. Whatare the reasons behind them? A considerable rise in prices for individual frequently purchasedproducts, even when it is driven by one-off factors, makes people expect an increase in pricesfor a broader range of goods and services. This in turn explains the readiness to pay moreand pushes prices upwards. Actually, we are already observing such an environment, whichonce again proves that households’ inflation expectations are currently not anchored yet.When I say that they are not anchored, I do not imply the level of households’ inflationexpectations, but rather their response to one-off factors. The fact that households’ inflationexpectations are significantly higher than current inflation is typical not only of Russia,but of a whole range of countries (even where inflation is very low). In terms of monetary policy,this is the sensitivity of inflation expectations to temporary or local factors which induces risks,rather than the fact that households’ inflation expectations exceed inflation measures.This is clear from the analysis of the reasons causing inflation deviation away from our October’sforecast. This deviation is quite notable — +0.7 percentage points. According to preliminaryestimates, 0.2 percentage points of this deviation stem from a faster rise in sugar and sunflower 1 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
oil prices and 0.3 percentage points — from the growth of grain export prices and their pass-through to prices for both bakery products and a broader range of food products. The remaining0.2 percentage points are interpreted as additional steady inflationary pressure. It may result fromboth a faster revival of demand in a number of industries already facing supply-side constraintsand secondary effects brought about by increased inflation expectations. This is whatmay impact a steady level of inflationary pressure in the future as well.Therefore, today it is rather important how the situation will be unfolding in the future, includinghow inflation expectations will be changing and whether secondary effects may become moreintense. This may result in a longer-lasting influence of one-off factors on prices.Moreover, we should take into account that a rise in inflation expectations may speedup the growth of the demand for consumer lending which has already been expanding materiallyamid the accommodative monetary policy.Monetary conditions are the third factor we discussed when making our decision. Monetaryconditions remain accommodative. Coupled with the Government’s support measures, thispromotes lending across all segments, including the households, corporates, and smalland medium-sized businesses. The annual growth of corporate lending reached its five-year highin October. The offering of corporate bonds has also been expanding. Mortgage lendingcontinues to increase significantly.The portion of subsidised mortgage loans slightly contracted in October, but still equalsnearly 30% of the disbursements. Concessional lending terms will remain in place untilthe end of 2021 H1. A number of programmes launched to support corporate lending havealready been terminated. We are going to monitor how market interest rates and non-pricelending conditions will be adjusting in this situation.The current economic situation is another essential factor influencing our decisions.The epidemiological situation has worsened today, which expectedly has a restraining effect,but this impact is currently considerably lower than in 2020 Q2.Although the situation is not uniform across industries, the decrease in economic activityis not as drastic as in spring and early summer when large-scale anti-pandemic restrictionswere in place. Furthermore, companies and households have already adjusted to the changedenvironment to a certain extent, including additional requirements. Therefore, we may rather talkof a pause in recovery processes.We can observe that economic trends and financial flows are changing unevenly. They havereturned to normal or even exceeded this level in a number of sectors, while other industriesare far from a complete recovery. Specifically, industries manufacturing and selling consumerand investment goods have increased their financial flows above pre-pandemic levels.In contrast, sectors producing intermediate goods (that is, intended for further processing)and many consumer service industries are still to restore their financial flows and businessactivity.If we estimate the year 2020 in general, GDP will decline by about 4% owing to high performancein Q3. The economy bounced back significantly in response to the easing of restrictionsand support measures. It is also worth noting that, amid limited opportunities to travel abroad thisyear, households kept over 1.5 trillion rubles earlier spent for outbound tourism. In 2020, thesefunds could partially be saved, but a portion of this amount was spent in Russia, proppingup domestic demand.Fiscal measures provide significant support to the economy. This year, budget spendingincreased by over 14% against 2019. 2 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
Recovery growth is expected to resume steadily in spring 2021.Given the economic situation and price movements, the ratio of proinflationary and disinflationaryfactors and risks has altered considerably.Indeed, demand trends, especially amid the drastic aggravation of the epidemiological situation,continue to contain price growth. However, this impact is currently offset by the above-mentionedproinflationary factors. As I have already said, we will assess whether these factors becomesteady against the backdrop of increased inflation expectations.Moreover, the influence of demand on prices will also depend on future changesin the epidemiological situation, the pace of recovery processes when vaccines become widelyused, and an improvement of consumer sentiment and business expectations. As we couldobserve in summer and early autumn, when the situation returns to normal, the recoverymay be sufficiently quick.At the moment, we consider it too early to adjust our medium-term inflation forecast sinceit is necessary to also analyse the effect of competing factors on price movements. As regardsthe near future, our preliminary estimates show that annual inflation willapproximate 5% in 2021 Q1. Further on, if the influence of one-off factors diminishes rather fast,it will trend down and return to 4% by mid-2021. Given the accommodative monetary policypursued, inflation is expected to equal 3.5–4.0% by the end of 2021, subsequently stabilisingclose to 4%. We will carry out an additional analysis to assess whether there are groundsfor adjusting our forecast in February, for the core meeting on the key rate.As regards other risks for medium-term economic development and inflation, their estimatehas remained unchanged overall.Various geopolitical risks are still relevant — they may provoke fluctuations in financial markets,affect exchange rate expectations and sentiments, and influence trends in the Russianand global economies.As always, further changes in budget spending are a critical factor. This has a considerableinfluence on our monetary policy decisions.There is still uncertainty about the estimate of the pandemic impact on the Russian economy’spotential, especially amid the current worsening of the epidemiological situation.Given such highly uneven trends in the economy and price movements, we will need to carryout an additional analysis of how the situation will be changing and whether we still have someroom for cutting the key rate when making our key rate decisions in the future. It is hard to affirmthis now. If the impact of one-off factors wanes quickly and inflation expectations reverse,it is entirely possible that there may be grounds for a further reduction in the key rate, yet this willnot necessarily be the case.I would also like to emphasise that it is now crucial to maintain the robustness of the monetarypolicy to various scenarios. Our policy is aimed at keeping inflation close to 4% underany scenario of future developments.We are ending this year with another important step in our communication. We are startingto release our regular report ‘Regional Economy: Commentaries by Bank of Russia MainBranches’ on the Bank of Russia website. This report is prepared by our regional branchesfor the Board of Directors’ key rate meetings and will contain the most up-to-date informationon the situation in the Russian regions. When preparing for decision-making, we usually considereconomic trends in Russia in general and across regions and assess both statistics and surveyfindings. This helps us better understand the economic situation and its specifics. 3 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
We are publishing the first issue of the report today and are going to release it on a regular basis,eight times a year, prior to the quiet period. We hope that this material will be interestingand useful to a wide range of readers. 4 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
Liu Guoqiang: Profit cutting by financial institutions in support ofreal economySpeech by Mr Liu Guoqiang, Deputy Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the State CouncilPolicy Briefing on “Profit Cutting by Financial Institutions in Support of Real Economy”, 6November 2020.*   *   *Dear friends from the press, good morning! The CPC Central Committee and the State Councilhave been attaching great importance to financial support for the real economy. GeneralSecretary Xi Jinping stressed that finance provides the lifeblood for the real economy, and thatserving the real economy is the duty and purpose of the financial sector. Premier Li Keqiangpointed out that, the financial sector should hold reasonable profit cutting as a key in facilitatingsurvival and growth of enterprises and stabilizing economic fundamentals. The State Council hasconvened multiple executive meetings to study and arrange the work of financial support for thereal economy, and held policy briefings to keep the public informed of the implementation andprogress of relevant policy measures. Now, I will briefly introduce the implementation andoutcomes of relevant policy measures introduced since the beginning of this year.Working together with relevant departments to earnestly implement the decisions andarrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, the PBC and theCBIRC have guided and urged financial institutions to enhance efforts to effectively support thedevelopment of the real economy since the beginning of 2020. First, the sound monetary policyhas been pursued in a more flexible and appropriate manner. A mix of monetary policy tools,including required reserve ratio (RRR) cuts, medium-term lending facility (MLF), open marketoperations (OMOs), central bank lending and central bank discounts, have been applied to keepliquidity adequate at a reasonable level and keep overall market interest rates stable with a slightdecline. Second, the loan prime rate (LPR) reform has constantly delivered benefits. The PBChas guided the MLF rates and OMO rates to move downward by 0.3 percentage points, whichdrove down the LPR correspondingly and markedly pushed down lending rates for enterprises.The collective transition of the pricing benchmark of outstanding floating-rate loans was kicked offas scheduled and completed at end-August 2020, so as to reduce the interests paid byenterprises for outstanding loans. Third, structural monetary policy tools have been implementedto provide liquidity in a well-targeted way. The RMB1.8 trillion quotas of central bank lending andcentral bank discounts were launched in three batches and have been gradually put in place. Thetwo monetary policy tools that enable direct support for the real economy, namely one forprovisional deferment of loan repayments by micro, small and medium-sized enterprises(MSMEs) and the other for supporting unsecured inclusive loans to micro and small businesses(MSBs), have been carried out at a faster pace, which further boosted direct support for MSBs.Fourth, banks have been urged to reduce fees and cut profits. Measures have been taken toregulate the collection of fees in the course of credit granting, assistance for loan acquisition,credit enhancement and appraisal, and to urge the banks to implement policies on reducing feesand cutting profits and take the initiative in easing the burden on the real economy. Fifth, supporthas been extended to enterprises’ restructuring and debt-for-equity swaps. A considerablenumber of large-sized enterprises and conglomerates have negotiated with banks, insurers andtrust institutions on the delay, extension or restructuring of their debts, or on the deferment,reduction or exemption of part of their loan principal and interest repayments, and someenterprises with special difficulties have been under bankruptcy reorganization.Overall, the measures have produced remarkable results, with the quality and efficiency of thefinancial sector in serving the real economy continuously improving, and money and creditgrowing reasonably. As of end-September, broad money supply (M2) and aggregate financing tothe real economy (AFRE) grew by 10.9 percent and 13.5 percent year on year respectively, up2.5 percentage points and 2.8 percentage points from the same period of a year earlier 1 / 2BIS central bankers' speeches
respectively, representing a significant acceleration of year-on-year growth rates. Financingcosts have been lowered noticeably. In September, lending rates for enterprises stood at 4.63percent, decreasing by 0.61 percentage points year on year, a relatively low level in history. Thegoal of “increasing volume, expanding coverage and lowering price” for MSB financing has beenachieved. As of end-September, MSB financing increased by RMB3 trillion, RMB1.2 trillion morethan the increase in the same period last year; the financing covered a total of 31.28 millionMSBs, up 21.8 percent year on year; the interest rates of new inclusive MSB loans in Septemberaveraged 4.92 percent, 0.96 percentage points lower than that in December 2019.According to the estimates based on the statistics of the PBC and the CBIRC, in the first 10months this year, the financial system waive profits of around RMB1.25 trillion in favor of the realeconomy, through channels including interest rate cuts, the two tools providing direct support forthe real economy, fee reduction, and support for enterprises’ restructuring and debt-for-equityswaps. It is expected that the annual target of profit cuts in the amount of RMB1.5 trillion will beattained.Next, the PBC will join hands with the CBIRC and other relevant departments to resolutelyimplement the guidelines of the Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th CPC Central Committee andthe decisions and arrangements made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council,follow the people-centered approach, uphold the new philosophy of development, remaincommitted to deepening reform and opening-up, adhere to systemic views, keep unleashing thebenefits of relevant policies, and continue to motivate the financial system to cut profits in favor ofthe real economy, so as to achieve the annual target and create favorable conditions forconstructing a new development pattern and promoting high-quality development. Thank you. 2 / 2BIS central bankers' speeches
Nina Stoyanova: Adaptation and management of digital portfolios,digital banking services and client contacts in a pandemic crisisSpeech by Ms Nina Stoyanova, Deputy Governor and Head of the Banking Department of theBulgarian National Bank, at the opening of the videoconference "Adaptation and Management ofDigital Portfolios, Digital Banking Services and Client Contacts in a Pandemic Crisis", organizedby the Banker newspaper, 17 November 2020.*   *   *I would like to welcome you to the video conference on “Adaptation and management of digitalportfolios, digital banking services and customer contacts in a pandemic crisis", organized by theBanker newspaper.In its “Strategy for the Digitalisation of EU Financial Services", the European Commission statesthat the future of finance is digital. However, we can safely say that not only the future but alsothe present of finance is inextricably linked to digitalisation. This was clearly seen in theunprecedented situation caused by the coronavirus, in which it was through digital technologiesthat the continuity of the provision of financial services to consumers and businesses wasensured. The pandemic is about to permanently change our way of life, accelerating theprocesses of digitalization in all spheres of life – work, entertainment, shopping, administrativeservices. We are witnessing the emergence of new business models, services and solutionsthat create value, save time and effort, but at the same time are accompanied by new risks andchallenges – both technological,This trend in the development of the financial sector is particularly visible in the dynamic andcustomer-oriented area of payments. Undoubtedly, the catalyst for these processes is theEuropean legislation in this area, namely the Second Payment Services Directive, known asPSD2. As the main innovations in it we can highlight two aspects – opening access to paymentaccounts (the so-called “open banking”) and increasing the requirements for the security ofelectronic payments. These were the areas in which in 2020 the efforts and attention of both thebusiness and the regulator continued to be focused.As part of the first aspect, the directive introduced two new types of payment services providedentirely on the Internet – payment initiation and account information services, and regulated theactivities of providers offering them. The provision of new services requires interaction betweenpayment service providers who maintain customer accounts (most often banks) and therespective providers that offer new services. Most payment service providers holding accounts inour market have chosen to achieve this interaction by creating special interfaces for automatedaccess to their managed payment accounts (so-called application programming interface – API).Despite the created interfaces, the offer of the new services in Bulgaria, as well as in a numberof other countries of the European Union, is still limited. In order to achieve a harmonizedapplication of legislation at European level and to support payment initiation and accountinformation service providers, the European Banking Authority (EBA) adopted an opinion onobstacles in early June 2020. within the meaning of Art. 32 (3) of the regulatory technicalstandards for in-depth identification of the customer and common and secure standards ofcommunication. The opinion highlights a number of technical or organizational obstacles thatpayment service providers, which maintain accounts, pose to the new services and whichshould be removed. Examples of such obstacles include the unavailability of all procedures forperforming in-depth identification of the customer when using the new services, requiring manualentry of the IBAN on the payment account from which payment is initiated or requesting accountinformation, repeated in-depth establishing the identity when initiating payment, the need toprovide prior consent to the client to use the new services, etc.1 1 / 2BIS central bankers' speeches
Improving the security of electronic payments is the second major aspect of PSD2. InSeptember 2019, the requirements for payment service providers to apply a procedure for in-depth identification of the customer when the payer accesses his payment account online,initiates an electronic payment transaction or performs another remote action that could occurrisk of payment fraud. These requirements have started to apply to credit transfers made throughthe Internet and mobile banking platforms. However, for online card payment transactions, due tothe necessary significant technical changes, both for payment service providers and merchantsoperating e-shops,However, the delayed application of security requirements for online card transactions should notadversely affect customers. During the transitional period, payment service providers shouldrecover the value of all unauthorized card payment transactions on the Internet for which no in-depth identification of the customer has been applied, and the BNB monitors compliance withthis requirement. Although the pandemic has led to some delays in the implementation ofmigration plans, according to available data, we expect Bulgaria to successfully completemigration by the end of the year within the projected pan-European deadline.Along with the work on the implementation of the current legal framework, many efforts arefocused on its further improvement with a view to the emergence of innovative marketparticipants, new technologies, changing business models. In September, the EuropeanCommission published the Digital Finance Package, part of which is the “EU Strategy for RetailPayments” and the “Strategy for the Digitalisation of EU Financial Services". The aim of bothstrategies is to outline the medium-term guidelines and priorities for the development ofdigitalization in the financial sector. Central to the payment strategy is immediate payments,executed within seconds, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, 365 days a year, called the “new rule”in the strategy.Bulgaria is not lagging behind these trends. The project of Borika AD for immediate payments inBGN, based on the requirements of the SEPA scheme for immediate credit transfers, is in anadvanced stage of development. As an operator of the real-time gross settlement paymentsystem (RINGS), the BNB assists in the implementation of the project. The company’s ambitionis in 2021 for payment service providers in Bulgaria to start providing their customers withimmediate credit transfers in BGN.In order to develop innovative, affordable, secure and convenient payment solutions both in theonline environment and in physical stores, it is important to provide an interoperableinfrastructure that allows the smooth execution of cross-border immediate payments within theEU, as well as the achievement of additional standardization to ensure compatibility between finalpayment solutions offered to payment service users (eg common standard for QR codes,provision of access to NFC chips in mobile phones, etc.). These, as well as other aspectsrelated to technological changes in the field of payments, including the risks arising fromunregulated services, especially technical ones, which are ancillary to the provision of regulatedpayment services,I wish interesting and fruitful work to the participants in the videoconference.Opinion of the European Banking Authority on obstacles under Article 32 (3) of the RTS on SCA and CSC1 2 / 2BIS central bankers' speeches
 I would like to thank Patrick Alexander, Calista Cheung, Daniel de Munnik,  Lena Suchanek and Ben Tomlin for their help in preparing this speech.  Not for publication before December 15, 2020 14:30 Eastern Time      Remarks by Tiff Macklem Governor of the Bank of Canada Greater Vancouver Board of Trade December 15, 2020 Vancouver, British Columbia (via Webcast)   Trading for a sustainable recovery  Introduction The year is coming to an end, and not a moment too soon. I’m sure most of us can’t wait to turn the page on 2020 and COVID-19. The pandemic has touched everyone, and the hardship has been severe for many. Some of you have lost loved ones. Others have lost jobs or businesses. And we all miss our family and friends, especially at this time of year.  For months, we’ve wondered when we can get back to something approaching normal. I wish I could be in Vancouver delivering this speech in person and hearing about your concerns directly. Unfortunately, the time for face-to-face meetings has not yet come. But we can be together virtually, and I thank you for the invitation to speak with you today.  The recent positive news on vaccines provides some reassurance that more normal activities can resume sometime later next year. However, the path from here to there looks difficult. A second wave of COVID-19 is sweeping across much of the country, leading to renewed restrictions. These will weigh on economic growth early next year and increase the strain on Canadian families and businesses. I don’t want to downplay these difficulties. But today, I want to look beyond this second wave and focus on a critical piece of our economic recovery—trade. So far, household spending has led the way. But for the economy to fully recover, it needs to be firing on more than one cylinder. To be sustainable, the recovery must broaden to include exports and, with this, business investment.  Because we all need to lift our spirits as we head into the holiday season, I want to end the year with some cautious optimism. My message is that exports and business investment could bounce back from this recession more quickly than they did after the global financial crisis. But for this to happen, we all have some work to do.   Allow me to start by looking back a decade to the recovery from the global financial crisis to compare how trade was evolving then with how it is evolving 
 - 2 - now. I’ll show you what’s at stake with a robust export recovery. And I’ll close with some thoughts on how we can improve the odds of bringing this about.   Comparing crises The global financial crisis pummelled the world economy back in 2008 and 2009. But Canada fared relatively well because of our strong financial system. Our recession was shorter and shallower than in most other economies. But our exports were hit hard—indeed, harder than most. That’s because of our close ties with the United States, which was the epicentre of the crisis. While global exports fell by less than 20 percent, Canadian exports fell by close to 30 percent.  As is usually the case in recessions, demand for goods was particularly affected. Canada swung from having a large trade surplus in goods to a small deficit. (Chart 1).  Canadian exports began to recover immediately after the crisis, but the rebound stalled. Weak foreign demand, particularly from the United States, was holding exports back. But that wasn’t the whole story.  Bank of Canada researchers spent a lot of time dissecting these disappointing exports and zeroed in on two fundamental issues: geography and competitiveness. Two-thirds of Canada’s underperformance was blamed on geography—who we trade with. Canadian export markets were concentrated in mature economies with relatively slow growth, such as the United States, rather than faster-growing emerging-market economies, largely in Asia. The remainder of this poor performance was tied to a lack of competitiveness: unit labour costs in Canada were higher than elsewhere because of slow productivity growth and -80-60-40-2002040608010020002002200420062008201020122014201620182020Can$ billionsGoodsServicesTotal tradeChart 1:Canada's trade balance has been negative since the global financial crisis(Quarterly data, seasonally adjusted annual rate)Last observation: 2020Q3Source: Statistics Canada
 - 3 - the impact of a stronger currency. Canada’s regulatory regime and investment climate were also cited as impediments.1   Now let’s look at how this past experience compares with today. While the period leading up to the global financial crisis was positive for trade, the period before the pandemic was anything but. Trade disputes arose between the United States and several other economies, including Canada, the European Union and particularly China. These disputes led to escalating tariffs and pervasive uncertainty about global policy. Bank researchers estimated that these factors combined would reduce global output by more than 1 percent—that’s more than $1 trillion—by the end of 2021.2 In this environment, it’s no wonder companies were reluctant to invest to expand their export capacity. Another difference between these crises is that, this time, trade in services has been affected much more than trade in goods (Chart 2). The impact on services was barely visible during the global financial crisis, whereas services fell along with goods in 2020. And overall, services haven’t recovered, even as goods have rebounded.  Consider international tourism exports, which are vital to British Columbia. Tourism has basically come to a full stop. Canadian education exports have also been hit by the pandemic. When a foreign student comes to Canada to study, the tuition counts as an export of education services. Before the pandemic, this was  1 D. de Munnik, J. Jacob and W. Sze, “The Evolution of Canada’s Global Export Market Share,” Bank of Canada Staff Working Paper No. 2012-31 (October 2012). See also T. Macklem, “Regearing our Economic Growth” (speech to the W. Edmund Clark Distinguished Lecture, Queen’s University, Kingston, Ontario, January 10, 2013). 2 Bank of Canada Monetary Policy Report, January 2020, p. 2. 60708090100110120t -2t -1tt +1t +2t +3t +4t +5t +6t +7t +8IndexStart date (t) +/-number of quartersGoods—GFCGoods—COVID-19Services—GFCServices—COVID-19Chart 2:Canadian exports: global financial crisis compared with COVID-19 pandemic(Nominal data, Seasonally adjusted annual rate, Index: start date = 100)Start dates: global financial crisis (GFC), 2008Q3; COVID-19 pandemic, 2020Q1    Last observation: 2020Q3Source: Statistics Canada
 - 4 - a large and fast-growing activity. In 2019, educational services exports were almost $14 billion, an increase of 67 percent from 2015.  The disproportionate impact of the pandemic on trade in services has significant implications for Canada. Services exports are only about a quarter of the size of goods exports. But services exports had been growing much more quickly than goods exports before the pandemic (Chart 3).    While many services exporters will struggle until a vaccine is widely available, some goods exporters have been able to adapt safety protocols and bounce back quickly. Motor vehicle and parts output, for example, came to an almost complete stop in the spring. Since then, the sector has regained nearly all of the lost ground as factories adapted their value chains and production processes. The rapid rebound in goods exports is certainly encouraging. By October, the value of goods exports had recovered almost 90 percent of the loss seen in the spring. If struggling services exporters can hang on until a vaccine is widely available, Canada’s export performance could avoid the serial disappointment of the period that followed the global financial crisis and help cement a sustainable recovery.  Of course, this is by no means guaranteed. The rebound in goods exports could fizzle out as companies finish rebuilding inventories, while prolonged hardship could force many services exporters to close their doors. And the underlying competitiveness challenges that have restrained export growth over the past decade have not gone away. More recently, the Canadian dollar has been appreciating, largely reflecting a broad-based depreciation of the US dollar. This is hurting the competitiveness of Canadian exporters in our largest market.  9010011012013014020152016201720182019IndexTotal goods and servicesTotal goodsTotal servicesCommercial servicesTravel servicesChart 3:Services exports outperformed goods exports before COVID-19(Seasonally adjusted annual rate, Index: 2015Q1 = 100)Last observation: 2019Q4Source: Statistics Canada
 - 5 - Two scenarios for trade Where does the trade story go from here? Let’s imagine a couple of plausible scenarios: one pessimistic, one optimistic.   In the pessimistic scenario, the global spread of COVID-19 fuels anti-globalization sentiment and a continued rise in protectionism. This is not far-fetched. A recent Ipsos poll found significant support among Canadians for measures that would make the country less reliant on international trade. The same poll found much less support for measures that would help Canadian companies export more. This is troubling because international markets are essential for Canadian companies to achieve competitive scale in their operations and because Canada benefits from imports in many important ways.  In the pessimistic scenario, we also fail to diversify our trade or improve our competitiveness. Rivalry and distrust between the United States and China thwart our efforts to develop export markets in Asia. Investment remains weak, and our productivity growth continues to lag. What’s more, new market access for our energy products doesn’t come on stream, holding back Canada’s ability to ship our number one export—oil. And without that market access, investment in cleaner oil-extraction technologies dries up. The bottom line is that exports fail to rebound, and trade does not become a reliable engine of growth. In the optimistic scenario, many of these same forces break the other way. The strong rebound in world trade we have seen to date continues, and the protectionist forces that have dominated in recent years begin to fade. Unprecedented international cooperation to develop new vaccines and supply them across borders proves to be a potent demonstration of the benefits of globalization. That success shifts public opinion. Governments start to knock down the tariff walls they had begun to build, and uncertainty lifts as governments recommit to a rules-based trading order.  In the optimistic scenario, efforts to diversify markets for Canadian exports start to bear fruit. Canada’s productivity improves as a result of increased investment and the deployment of new technologies, which boosts the economy’s competitiveness. Canada and the new US administration cooperate on a North American approach to energy and climate change. Canada’s oil and gas sector benefits from access to markets. And we start to see an integrated continental approach to business opportunities from low-carbon growth. In this scenario, we see a resurgence of trade and business investment, which bolsters the economic recovery. The stakes are high. Using one of the Bank’s economic projection models, Bank economists estimated the impact of two scenarios that are less extreme than the ones I have just described.3 In their optimistic scenario, Canada’s trade balance  3 In the staff’s pessimistic scenario, estimates about the impact of tariffs and uncertainty on trade are maintained, while competitiveness losses, as proxied by the share of manufacturing in GDP, decline at the pace observed from 2010 to 2013. In the optimistic scenario, the negative judgment related to domestic trade uncertainty is removed, while the proxy for competitiveness increases gradually and returns to the level observed immediately following the global financial crisis. Staff  
 - 6 - would be more than $30 billion better by the end of 2024 than it would be otherwise. This would roughly eliminate our current trade deficit. But in their pessimistic scenario, exports would actually drift lower rather than recover, reducing incomes, while our current trade deficit would worsen by about 60 percent (Chart 4).  In reality, the outcome will probably fall somewhere between the two extremes. Obviously, we all hope that real life turns out closer to the optimistic scenario than the pessimistic. But hope is not a strategy. We need to think strategically to increase the odds of a strong trade recovery.  Markets for our products Business leaders and policy-makers each have important roles to play. They need to work together to leverage, broaden and deepen global markets for Canadian products. Thanks to the signing of the Canada-US-Mexico Agreement, the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement with the European Union, and the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership, Canada already has some of the best market access in the world. Further, we have numerous bilateral trade deals in place. The business community and governments across Canada need to work together to leverage these market opportunities. The business community can capitalize on this market access by investing in people and in productive capacity. We know Canada has an incredibly diverse workforce—people have come from around the globe to live here, bringing their global connections and knowledge with them. And we’ve seen clear evidence  researchers add an estimate of the impact of the reopening of the Oshawa auto plant in the optimistic scenario. -30-20-100102030402021202220232024Can$ billionsUpsideDownsidePeak impact:$53 billionLast data plotted: 2024Q4Chart 4:Evolutionof trade deficit in two scenariosReal trade deficit, difference from base caseNote: Assumes no policy rate reaction
 - 7 - that shifting populations can drive trade.4 Smart companies can leverage Canada’s workforce advantage to build global markets for their products. Companies can also look to global supply chains for growth opportunities. Supply chains are trending toward more regional networks around major global trade hubs. Global companies invest in the resilience of their supply chains through diversification of suppliers or production locations, and through digitalization and automation. Canadian companies need to seize these opportunities to be part of the solution.  As policy-makers and business leaders, we have the responsibility to explain the importance of rules-based trade. We need to push for a renewal of the spirit of internationalism that served so many countries well for decades. And we need to make sure that the benefits of open trade are shared fairly within and across economies.  With COVID-19 accelerating the digital economy, rules for digital trade and competition are more critical than ever. This also highlights the urgent need for a concerted, internationally coordinated effort to improve the ability to measure the digital economy. This is a priority for Statistics Canada, but much more work remains, and success will require cooperation across countries.5 Products for our markets As much as geographic diversification remains important, it’s not going to be easy or happen quickly. So, let’s look at this another way. We do need to develop new, fast-growing markets for our products, but we also need to develop new, fast-growing products for our markets. We have to grow and scale up production of high-value goods and services that we can export.  The BC economy offers some leading examples of how this approach can work. On the services side, there are lots of success stories in Vancouver—where the world’s first commercial quantum computer was built and now the home of one of Canada’s most important technology hubs. Activity in these hubs is driving strong growth in exports that are as easy to ship to South Africa as they are to Seattle. Canadian exports of knowledge-intensive services such as research and development, computer and information services, and intellectual property grew by close to 12 percent over the past three years (Chart 5). It’s clear that digital services—including e-commerce, online education and application development—will be an important part of the future of trade. So will other BC specialties, such as video game production and animation studios.  The pandemic is also accelerating growth in other technology services. Doctors and hospitals are finding new ways to use technology to provide health care  4 W. Steingress, “The Causal Impact of Migration on US Trade: Evidence from Political Refugees,” Canadian Journal of Economics 51, no. 4 (October 2018): 1312–1338. K. Head and J. Ries, “Immigration and Trade Creation: Econometric Evidence from Canada,” Canadian Journal of Economics 31, no. 1 (February 1998): 47–62.   5 Staff at the central banks of the G7 countries are working to raise awareness of the need for better measurement from a monetary policy perspective (see the 2019 report of the G7 Digitalization Working Group chaired by the Bank of Canada). 
 - 8 - virtually. With the explosion of remote office work, there are tremendous opportunities in areas such as cyber security, cloud computing and the development of virtual workplaces. Given the worldwide nature of the pandemic, advances in the digital economy can more easily become scalable, fast-growing exports.  We’ve also seen lots of BC companies innovating by applying new technology in traditional goods sectors. Think forestry. We know the industry is under pressure from long-term supply constraints. But companies are adapting. Instead of wasting bark, wood chips and sawdust, companies are turning these into bioenergy. Canada is now the world’s second-largest exporter of wood pellets—an attractive fuel replacement for coal in power plants. The mass timber industry provides another example. The 18-storey Brock Commons Tallwood House on Management and advertisement servicesInsurance and financeKnowledge-intensive services (Research and development, intellectual property, computer and information)Technical services (architectural, engineering, etc.)Audio-visual servicesOther business services-5-4-3-2-1012345-10-5051015202530Average nominal growth (2016–19)Knowledge-intensive sectors have been growing rapidly, positively contributing to Canada's trade balanceSource: Statistics CanadaNote: Bubble size corresponds to scale of exports in billions of dollars.Bubble colour indicates positive if red, negative if blue. %Can$ billionsChart 5:
 - 9 - the University of British Columbia’s campus, which uses structural wood to replace most of the steel and cement, is a shining example of how Canadian innovation and know-how can create new high-value and sustainable products from our natural resources. You can find similar examples across other sectors such as mining and agriculture.  Finally, I want to mention another opportunity that is also a strength for British Columbia—renewable energy and other green technologies. This includes clean energy production, goods such as solar panels, and services such as design and construction. Vancouver is home to one-quarter of Canada’s clean technology companies, with revenues of about $3.5 billion last year.6 The export potential of green technology is obvious, given global concerns about climate change.  Winning in global markets That brings me to my final topic, which is Canada’s ability to compete and win in global markets. We won’t be able to fully capitalize on our opportunities unless we take steps to improve our productivity and competitiveness.  Businesses have the leading role to play here. Investment in productivity-enhancing machinery and equipment is vital. So is a commitment to research and development and to constantly train and re-skill employees.  Several factors contribute to business investment decisions. But right now, the Bank of Canada has given forward guidance that borrowing costs are going to be low for a long while, and there’s light at the end of the tunnel as vaccines roll out. This seems an opportune time for companies to look at how they judge the rate of return on potential investments—the so-called hurdle rate. Taking a longer-term approach to capital investment could unlock a myriad of viable growth opportunities. Policy-makers, for their part, can help by removing barriers to business investment and impediments to growth of smaller firms. Let me mention three areas of focus. First is the ongoing need to remove obstacles to interprovincial trade. This comes up regularly in the Bank’s conversations with business leaders. Over the past nine months, the provinces and the federal government have demonstrated tremendous cooperation in dealing with the pandemic. Think what we could achieve if that same spirit of cooperation was applied to removing barriers to the movement of goods, services and professionals across provincial borders.  A second area of focus is infrastructure. Exporters will remain reluctant to invest if the infrastructure to get their products to market doesn’t exist. Canada has made some progress here. The LNG plant being built in Kitimat is one notable example that will help our energy exports in the future. However, more needs to be done. I met with leaders of a number of logistics companies last month. They shared their concerns about bottlenecks, particularly at ports. Fast-growing exports need reliable transportation infrastructure, including efficient, high-capacity ports. And I know that both the Port of Vancouver and Port of Prince  6 See KPMG, British Columbia Cleantech: 2019 Status Report (February 2020).  
 - 10 - Rupert are working on major capacity expansions. This is encouraging. Boosting our export capacity also requires building the information and data infrastructure needed to compete in a digital world.  A third area of focus is people. Our biggest asset is a well-educated and diverse workforce. For the past four years, the policies and attitudes of the US administration helped make Canada look more attractive to students and workers, giving us an advantage. With the incoming US administration, Canadian schools and companies may have to fight harder to attract and retain talent. But being a welcoming country remains an important advantage, and immigration creates economic capacity. We need to focus on ensuring that Canada maintains a well-educated, multinational workforce to attract foreign investment, leading to increased exports.  Conclusion It’s time for me to conclude. The economic recovery from the pandemic is at a very difficult stage. Near term, rising COVID-19 infections will dampen growth and could even deepen our economic hole. Uncertainty is elevated, and the recovery is going to be long and choppy.  Nevertheless, there is room for cautious optimism that international trade will recover more quickly from the pandemic than it did from the global financial crisis, and Canadian businesses need to be ready. Since the initial shutdowns last spring, trade has bounced back faster than many economists had predicted. Recent international surveys suggest executives expect trade to be strong in 2021.7 And the news of effective new vaccines puts a more certain timeline on the resurgence of global demand. There is no single path to stronger exports, and as business leaders, you need to decide on the best strategies to move your company forward. These include investing in new markets and products and improving your competitive position. As a country, we need to leverage the broad trade access we have and work with like-minded countries to foster a renewed spirit of open, rules-based trade that works for the 21st century. We also need to remove barriers to investment and other obstacles that keep Canada punching below its weight in global markets.  Think about the opportunities and imagine the possibilities. Canada has dynamic business leaders with good ideas, and Canadian businesses have responded to the pandemic with ingenuity. We also have a diverse, well-educated workforce and significant global market access. The Bank of Canada has pledged to support the investment climate by keeping borrowing costs low until economic slack is gone. Together, we can secure a resurgence in exports, broaden the recovery and put the economy on a sound, sustainable path.  7 HSBC, Navigator 2020: Now, Next and How for Business (2020).   
Yi Gang: Supporting low carbon development with green financeVideo speech by Mr Yi Gang, Governor of the People's Bank of China, at the Singapore FinTechFestival (SFF) 2020, 9 December 2020.*   *   *Ladies and gentlemen, dear friends,It is my great pleasure to attend the fintech festival virtually. Environmental and climatechallenges remain urgent as countries respond to COVID-19. They affect us all, and theirconsequences will be more lasting and far-reaching.Recently, China has announced the aim to reach carbon emission peak by 2030, and achievecarbon neutrality by 2060. This long-term vision reflects China’s commitment to green and lowcarbon development. It also means, to meet this climate objective, China needs to speed up itstransition to low-carbon production and consumption.China has made great progress in supporting green finance. In 2016, the PBOC, together withother ministries, published the Guidelines for Establishing a Green Financial System. Guided bythis overarching design, we have established our green finance policy framework, andencouraged the development of a wide range of green finance products. As of June 2020,outstanding green lending in China exceeded 11 trillion yuan, ranking first globally, while the stockof green bonds totaled 1.2 trillion yuan, which is second largest in the world. This has beensupported by our work in the following areas.First, we have been improving the policy framework for green finance. The PBOC gradually rolledout specific policies on green bonds, green credit and environmental information disclosure. ThePBOC is in the process of updating the Green Bonds Endorsed Project Catalogue. The newversion is expected to remove projects related to fossil fuel production and consumption, whileinclude more climate-friendly activities. It demonstrates our strong commitment to reducingemissions. Moreover, the PBOC has strengthened policy incentives, including evaluating banks’performance in supporting green finance.Second, we have been encouraging innovation in green finance products. Green financeproducts in China became available quite early, and have become increasingly diversified, suchas green credit, green bonds, green agricultural insurance, clean energy insurance, and greentrusts.Third, we have established pilot zones for green finance development. We have launched pilotprograms for green finance reforms and innovation within 9 cities in 6 provinces since 2017. Inthese pilot programs, strong progress has been made in strengthening green finance policyframework, introducing new products and services, and implementing policy incentives.In the meantime, China has been a strong advocate for international cooperation on greenfinance. Together with Singapore and other countries, we have supported global climategovernance, including through platforms such as the G20, the Network of Central Banks andSupervisors for Greening the Financial System (NGFS), and the International Platform onSustainable Finance (IPSF).First, we included green finance in the agenda of China’s G20 presidency in 2016, when the G20Green Finance Study Group was set up and helped build consensus on green and sustainablefinance.Second, we jointly established the NGFS in December 2017, along with the Bank of England, theBank of France, the Monetary Authority of Singapore and other partners. 1 / 2BIS central bankers' speeches
Third, we jointly launched the IPSF work on common ground green taxonomy. In October 2019,the PBOC joined the IPSF with the aim to mobilize private funds for environmentally sustainableinvestment, together with public institutions from the EU, Singapore and other countries. Chinaand the EU have recently set up the Taxonomy Working Group under the IPSF.Green finance has great potential as more countries commit to carbon neutrality. The PBOC willfocus on the following priorities to better support green recovery and green transition.First, we will further improve green finance standards to support the carbon neutrality objective.As we update our standards for green credit, green bonds and green funds, we will make sureprojects supported by the green finance standards do not compromise our climate objectiveswhile supporting environmental goals.Second, we will consider the possibility of mandatory requirements for financial institutions todisclose environment related information.Third, we will enhance capacity for analyzing and managing environment and climate risks. ThePBOC will strengthen study on the potential impact of environment and climate risks on financialstability.Fourth, we will provide easier access for international investors to China’s green finance market.We will promote harmonization of green finance standards at home and abroad by updatingdomestic standards and strengthening international cooperation.In addition, the PBOC will continue to harness FinTech in promoting green finance. In our greenfinance pilot zones, we have made efforts to embed FinTech in green finance. For example, inHuzhou city, the local government established an integrated green finance service platform byusing big data technology. It reduces the asymmetry on environment- and climate-relatedinformation, and bridges green projects and financial institutions. It also allows the PBOC tomonitor green loans provided by banks as well as other underlying data.Financial technologies, such as Big Data, Artificial Intelligence and Blockchain, are expected toplay an increasingly important role in supporting green finance. I am happy to see many FinTechfirms attending this virtual event. The PBOC will continue to work with all partners in mobilizingmore private funds to support low carbon and sustainable development.Thank you. 2 / 2BIS central bankers' speeches
Yannis Stournaras: Welcome address - 4th ECB SimulationConferenceWelcome address by Mr Yannis Stournaras, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the 4th ECBSimulation Conference, organised by the “Get Involved” student initiative and supported by theBank of Greece, the Department of Banking and Financial Management of the University ofPiraeus and the General Secretariat for Youth,11 December 2020.*   *   *It is with great pleasure that I welcome you once again to the ECB Simulation Conference, thefourth one, organised by the “Get Involved” student initiative and supported by the Bank ofGreece, the Department of Banking and Financial Management of the University of Piraeus andthe General Secretariat for Youth.During the year since the last conference we have all lived in unprecedented circumstances dueto the COVID-19 pandemic outbreak around the globe. The pandemic has taken a heavy toll,primarily on human lives, as well as on citizens’ economic welfare. Governments both in Europeand elsewhere in the world had to respond by taking resolute action in order to shore up publichealthcare systems and by imposing social distancing measures with a view to containing thespread of the pandemic, which have however further weighed on economic activity. In an effort tomitigate the socioeconomic effects of the pandemic and of the related containment measures,official authorities promptly took crucial decisions.On the fiscal policy front, all European governments have resorted to high public spending tosupport output and employment, as well as to boost the economic recovery. Furthermore, at acollective level, the EU’s long-term budget (Multiannual Financial Framework) coupled with theestablishment of the Next Generation EU recovery instrument constitute the largest ever packageof recovery measures (totalling €1.8 trillion) in Europe to support workers, businesses andgovernments.On the part of the Eurosystem, comprising the national central banks, including the Bank ofGreece, which together with the European Central Bank (ECB) conduct monetary policy in theeuro area, we have adopted exceptional and bold monetary policy and banking supervisionmeasures aimed at addressing three major challenges: first, stabilise financial markets; second,ensure the continued flow of credit to every economic sector across the euro area; and third, reinin deflationary pressures. At the meetings of the Governing Council of the ECB, as early as lastMarch when the first signs of the new crisis became visible, we made swift and effectivedecisions in order to preserve favourable financing conditions and facilitate lending, on top of themeasures already in place prior to the pandemic, including a zero interest rate on the mainrefinancing operations and a negative deposit facility rate.Specifically, we decided to promptly introduce the Pandemic Emergency Purchase Programme(PEPP) to play the dual role of stabilising financial markets and providing additional monetaryaccommodation.In terms of its first role, i.e. smoothing out financial shocks, the design of the PEPP allows a highdegree of flexibility in the composition of purchases, thereby ensuring the effective transmissionof monetary policy across the euro area. More specifically, the monthly purchase volumes arenot fixed but may vary over time depending on the prevailing financial conditions. Also, while thebenchmark allocation of public sector securities across jurisdictions is guided by the key forsubscription to the ECB’s capital of each national central bank (reflecting the size of itseconomy), national central banks have been given the discretion to conduct purchasestemporarily in deviation from that capital key. This flexibility helps to address impairments in themonetary policy transmission mechanism, as a result of investors’ flight to safety amid 1 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
uncertainty, and to counter fragmentation risks in the euro area.Why is flexibility so important for the effectiveness of the PEPP? At the onset of the pandemic,some European countries were severely hit, while for some others the impact was comparativelymilder. Given this unevenness, the former group of countries faced heightened uncertainty, highvolatility in their financial markets and a surge in their government bond yields. Their yieldspreads versus the latter group of countries, which saw milder increases in their yields, thusskyrocketed to high levels. Purchases under the PEPP, which were allocated relatively moretowards bonds issued by harder hit countries, succeeded in drastically reducing those countries’government bond yields and spreads.As far as Greece is concerned, a crucial role in the stabilisation of domestic financial conditionswas also played by the waiver of the minimum credit quality requirements, applicable under theexisting Public Sector Purchase Programme (PSPP), which was granted for securities issuedby the Greek government, making them eligible for PEPP purchases. This decision is a primeexample of the efficiency related to the PEPP’s flexibility: as soon as the programme wasannounced, the Greek government bond yields declined sharply and now stand below their pre-pandemic levels. Guided by the need to safeguard the singleness of monetary policy throughoutthe euro area, the eligibility of Greek government bonds both for purchases under the PEPP andfor acceptance as collateral by Greek banks in the Eurosystem liquidity providing operationsshould be maintained, although the credit rating criteria are not met, as decided in April along witha package of temporary collateral easing measures.The second role of the PEPP refers to providing additional monetary stimulus, further to thatalready achieved through the Asset Purchase Programme (APP) implemented since 2015 inresponse to the then financial crisis. By purchasing bonds directly from banks, as well ascorporations, we provide them with additional funding. This reduces their funding costs andfacilitates banks’ capacity to increase credit supply, thus supporting consumption andinvestment. Hence, we are contributing to economic recovery and to inflation converging to ratesconsistent with price stability. In particular, the total APP holdings of the Eurosystem currentlyamount to almost €3 trillion, including the additional envelope decided last March (of €120 billionuntil the end of 2020). This amount is further augmented by the amount of assets purchasedunder the PEPP, which reached over €700 billion during 2020. Net asset purchases under theemergency programme will continue flexibly for at least until the end of March 2022 and in anycase until it is determined that the pandemic crisis is over, up to a total amount of €1.85 trillion,as we decided at the Governing Council’s meeting on 10 December 2020, taking into account thecontinued pandemic-related negative effects on inflation and growth. Furthermore, given the needfor support over a protracted period, we have decided that the maturing principal payments fromsecurities purchased under the PEPP will be reinvested until at least the end of 2023.With a view to ensuring that banks have sufficient liquidity and access to funding so that they canlend to households and firms at favourable rates, we deemed necessary to conduct additionalpandemic emergency longer-term refinancing operations (PELTROs) and to effectively ease theterms for the third series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO-III). The interestrate on these longer-term operations (together providing liquidity of about €1.75 trillion at thecurrent juncture) was set at negative levels, which in the case of TLTRO-III may even reach –1%for banks that maintain a steady growth rate of new loans to the private sector (PELTROs: –0.25%). Moreover, to facilitate banks’ participation in such operations, which are to be conducteduntil the end of 2021, we have decided that counterparties should benefit from collateral easingmeasures and that the range of eligible securities accepted as collateral should be temporarilyexpanded. In combination with the easing of banking supervision rules, such as allowing banks tooperate with a lower capital adequacy ratio during the pandemic period and extending theflexibility towards loan repayments, as well as with the provision of government guarantees toloans, the aforementioned monetary policy measures make a decisive contribution to theprotection of borrowers and the support of credit expansion. 2 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
Following the adoption of the above measures since the pandemic outbreak, the size of theEurosystem’s balance sheet has grown from about €4.7 trillion in early 2020 to more than €6.9trillion in December (over the same period, the balance sheet of the Bank of Greece hasincreased from around €110 billion to around €175 billion). The effectiveness of our prompt anddecisive monetary interventions is evidenced by a normalisation in financial conditions and astrengthening of macroeconomic outcomes. As estimated by the ECB, the package of thesemeasures could add 1.3 percentage points to euro area GDP growth and 0.8 percentage pointsto inflation in the period 2020–2022, while it has helped to preserve one million jobs. Withoutthese decisions, we would have faced much lower growth rates and more negative inflation ratesthan those currently observed.Nevertheless, there is no room for complacency. We are currently amidst the second wave ofthe pandemic, which creates renewed uncertainty among citizens. We estimate that thisuncertainty will remain elevated until an effective vaccine becomes widely available, which isexpected in mid-2021. Until then, the necessary social distancing measures exacerbate theeconomic fallout of the pandemic and hamper the recovery. In light of the above, fiscal andmonetary policies need to remain expansionary and mutually reinforcing, continuing to supportcitizens’ incomes, output and consumption across the euro area. We, the members of theGoverning Council, are ready to adjust the instruments available to the ECB as appropriate inorder to ensure that inflation moves on a sustained path towards levels consistent with ourprimary objective of price stability and that the euro area economy will recover.In tandem with our monetary policy decisions, which are based on an assessment of financialconditions and current macroeconomic developments, since the beginning of this year we havebeen reviewing our monetary policy strategy. The aim of the review is to make sure that ourstrategy is appropriate for delivering on our mandate to maintain price stability. The strategy waslast reviewed in 2003 and since then the world has undergone profound changes which call for are-definition of our strategy. More specifically, a substantial fall in the natural interest rate (i.e. theinterest rate at which the monetary policy stance becomes neutral) has been observed,diminishing the scope for an expansionary monetary policy through the conventional interest rateadjustment, as policy rates have reached historically low levels. Furthermore, developmentssuch as the changing financial environment and the rapid digitalisation (including digitalcurrencies), climate change, globalisation, as well as the slowdown in productivity and theongoing population ageing, pose new challenges for central banks.One of the issues to be addressed as part of our strategy review is the desirable level of inflationwe should be aiming for, in order to ensure price stability in a perfectly symmetric way, therebyreducing downward deviations from the inflation aim. We will also evaluate the appropriatemethodology for inflation measurement as well as the methods applied in our economic andmonetary analyses. It is very important for our prompt and effective reaction to possible futureshocks to fully grasp how inflation expectations are shaped, but also to incorporate the non-standard monetary policy measures that we have implemented over the past few years into ourstandard toolkit. Last but not least, we must incorporate the lessons learnt from the recentcrises, as well as the need to respond to new challenges, so that our strategy becomes aseffective as possible both now and in the future.Our strategy review process is expected to be finalised next year, taking also into accountfeedback from the general public, as we wish all citizens to understand our mission and ourdecisions.In this regard, your personal views on the following topics are indeed valuable:What does price stability mean for you?What are your economic expectations and concerns?1 3 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
What other topics matter to you?How can we best communicate with you?We look forward to receiving your views and opinions through your participation in the SimulationConference, a synopsis of which will be considered by the Governing Council of the ECB. Youmay also follow the relevant events currently organised by the Eurosystem.The ECB held on 21 October a virtual event, bringing together a range of civil societyorganisations, hosted by President Christine Lagarde and Chief Economist Philip Lane. Theevent was broadcast live on the internet, while a summary report was published after thelistening phase. Furthermore, the ECB offered all citizens the opportunity to express their viewsvia the ‘ECB Listens Portal’ to better understand their perspectives on the economy and whatthey expect from their central bank.On our part, we have scheduled our own listening event entitled ‘The Bank of Greece Listens’ inearly 2021, with the participation of social partners and with the aim of promoting dialogue on themonetary policy strategy.In closing, I would like to congratulate all those who have made this conference possible. See interview by President Christine Lagarde on 19 October 2020. ECB Listens event (europa.eu)212 4 / 4BIS central bankers' speeches
        For release on delivery 11:10 a.m. EST December 18, 2020         Strengthening the Financial System to Meet the Challenge of Climate Change    Remarks by  Lael Brainard  Member  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System  at   “The Financial System & Climate Change: A Regulatory Imperative”  hosted by the Center for American Progress  Washington, D.C.        December 18, 2020  
     I want to thank the Center for American Progress for inviting me to join you in discussing climate change and the U.S. financial system.1  Let me start by noting these are my own views and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. Climate change and the transition to a sustainable economy have important implications for the financial system.  The financial system can be a powerful enabler to help the private sector manage climate-related risks and invest in the transition.  It is vitally important to strengthen the U.S. financial system to meet the challenge of climate change. Meeting the Challenge of Climate Change Climate change is one of the major challenges of our time.2  There is growing evidence that extreme weather events related to climate change are on the rise— droughts, wildfires, hurricanes, and heatwaves are all becoming more common.3  Climate-related events are already adversely affecting the lives of many Americans.  The economic and financial impacts are also increasingly evident: we are already seeing                                                  1 I am grateful to Morgan Lewis, Beth Kiser, Carrie Johnson, Diana Hancock, and Nami Mukasa, as well as Norah Barger, Angelyque Campbell, Benjamin Dennis, Carol Evans, Joseph Firschein, Michael Kiley, Molly Mahar, Nancy Riley, Glenn Rudebusch, John Schindler, Susan Stawick, Kevin Stiroh, Nicholas Tabor, and Aurite Werman of the Federal Reserve for assistance in preparing this text.   2 See Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Global Warming of 1.5°C. An IPCC Special Report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate poverty (Geneva: Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change),  https://www.ipcc.ch/sr15/.  3 See WMO Task Team, Global Warming and Hurricanes: An Overview of Current Research Results (Princeton: Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, 2020), https://www.gfdl.noaa.gov/global-warming-and-hurricanes/; and The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance Climate Change Adaptation (Geneva: The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2012), 44–48, https://www.ipcc.ch/report/managing-the-risks-of-extreme-events-and-disasters-to-advance-climate-change-adaptation/changes-in-climate-extremes-and-their-impacts-on-the-natural-physical-environment/.  
     - 2 - elevated financial losses associated with an increased frequency and intensity of extreme weather events.4  Some have described Pacific Gas and Electric’s bankruptcy as the first climate-related bankruptcy of a major U.S. corporation.5   Average annual insured weather-related catastrophe losses have increased over the past decade.6  With losses increasing, insurers are incorporating the impact of climate change into their underwriting assumptions, pricing, and investment decisions.  Climate change is also likely to have a notable impact on coverage availability.7  Some insurers have discontinued policies in fire-prone areas, which, in turn, is changing the costs of homeownership and the risk profiles of previously underwritten mortgages.8   Similarly, mortgages in coastal areas are vulnerable to hurricanes and sea level rise.  New mortgages issued for U.S. coastal homes have, in aggregate, exceeded $60 billion annually in recent years.9  Recent research suggests that lenders hit by hurricanes, particularly in areas not typically affected by natural disasters, tend subsequently to securitize more of their mortgage loans, which could have higher climate risks, higher                                                  4 See “Billion-Dollar Weather and Climate Disasters: Overview,” National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) National Centers for Environmental Information, https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/billions/. 5  See Russell Gold, “PG&E: The First Climate-Change Bankruptcy, Probably Not the Last,” Wall Street Journal, January 18, 2019, https://www.wsj.com/articles/pg-e-wildfires-and-the-first-climate-change-bankruptcy-11547820006. 6 See “Sigma: Natural catastrophes in times of economic accumulation and climate change,” Lucia Bevere and Michael Gloor, https://www.swissre.com/institute/research/sigma-research/sigma-2020-02.html.  7 See Bradley Hope and Nicole Friedman, “Climate Change is Forcing the Insurance Industry to Recalculate,” Wall Street Journal, October 2, 2018, https://www.wsj.com/graphics/climate-change-forcing-insurance-industry-recalculate/. 8 See Michael Finney and Renee Koury, “Thousands of Homeowners in Fire Zones Are Losing Their Insurance,”ABC7 News, October 26, 2019, https://abc7news.com/insurance-companies-refusing-policies-in-wildfire-areas/5647865/. 9 See Matthew E. Kahn and Amine Quazed, “When Climate Change Leads to Mortgage Defaults,” Bloomberg, October 3, 2019, https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2019-10-03/when-climate-change-leads-to-mortgage-defaults.  
     - 3 - borrower defaults, and lower collateral values.10  Homeowners could also face increased hardship, since many homeowner insurance policies exclude flooding.11 Just as there are risks, there are also promising opportunities for private-sector investments in low-carbon innovation, infrastructure, energy, and transportation.  With support from accounting standard setters, credit rating agencies, and regulators, the financial system can provide useful signals to help the private sector manage climate risks and facilitate a smooth transition.12   Climate Risks and Financial Stability Climate change could pose important risks to financial stability.  That is true for both physical and transition risks.  A lack of clarity about true exposures to specific climate risks for physical and financial assets, coupled with uncertainty about the size and timing of these risks, creates vulnerabilities to abrupt repricing events.13  For example, a shift in the perceived frequency or severity of climate-related events, such as storms, floods, or wildfires, could rapidly change perceptions of risk and lead to rapid repricing                                                  10 See Matthew E. Kahn and Amine Quazed, “Mortgage Finance in the Face of Rising Climate Risk,” Working Paper 26322 (Cambridge: NBER, September 2019), https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w26322/revisions/w26322.rev0.pdf.; and Jesse Keenan and Jacob Bradt, “Underwaterwriting: from theory to empiricism in regional mortgage markets in the U.S.,” Climatic Change, June 4, 2020, 2034–2067, https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10584-020-02734-1. 11 “Flood Insurance,” FEMA, https://www.fema.gov/flood-insurance. 12 See Mark Carney, “The Road to Glasglow” (speech at Guildhall, London, England, February 27, 2020), https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/speech/2020/the-road-to-glasgow-speech-by-mark-carney.pdf?la=en&hash=DCA8689207770DCBBB179CBADBE3296F7982FD0); and Climate-Related Market Risk Subcommittee, Managing Climate Risk in the U.S. Financial System (Washington: Commodity Futures Trading Commission), https://www.cftc.gov/sites/default/files/2020-09/9-9-20%20Report%20of%20the%20Subcommittee%20on%20Climate-Related%20Market%20Risk%20-%20Managing%20Climate%20Risk%20in%20the%20U.S.%20Financial%20System%20for%20posting. pdf. 13 See Patrick Bolton, Morgan Despres, Luiz Awazu Pererira da Silva, Frederic Samama and Romain Svartzman, The Green Swan: Central Banking and Financial Stability in the Age of Climate Change (Basel: Bank for International Settlements, January 2020), https://www.bis.org/publ/othp31.pdf.  
     - 4 - of assets.14  Similarly, changes in investor expectations about future climate policies could lead to rapid and unexpected price changes that ripple through the financial system.15 Assessing climate risk effects is complex because the predicted path of climate change is nonlinear and has likely tipping points, beyond which changes in climate conditions could occur rapidly, and climate forecasts based on historical data are no longer relevant.16  This uncertainty in climate forecasts may reduce the accuracy of risk models used by investors, risk managers, asset managers, financial infrastructures, and leveraged financial institutions.   With accounting standards and disclosure frameworks for climate risk in the early stages of development and adoption, investors may lack transparency around the range of climate-related exposures facing financial firms, and non-financial short-term investors may be disinclined to fully price in longer-term climate effects.17  Some studies suggest                                                  14 See Francesc Ortega and Süleyman Taspinar, “Rising Sea Levels and Sinking Property Values: The Effects of Hurricane Sandy on New York’s Housing Market,” Journal of Urban Economics 106 (2018), 81–100. 15 See Manthos D. Delis, Kathrin de Greiff, and Steven Ongena, “Being Stranded with Fossil Fuel Reserves? Climate Policy Risk and the Pricing of Bank Loans,” Research Paper No. 18-10 (Geneva: Swiss Finance Institute, January 10, 2018), https://www.sfi.ch/en/publications/n-18-10-being-stranded-with-fossil-fuel-reserves-climate-policy-risk-and-the-pricing-of-bank-loans-s.-ongena-m.-d.-delis-and-k.-d.-greiff-2018..  16 See Yongyang Cai and Thomas S. Lontzek, “The Social Cost of Carbon with Economic and Climate Risks,” Journal of Political Economy (September 2019), Vol. 127, No. 6, https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/pdf/10.1086/701890. “The integrated assessment models (IAM) literature has recently studied the importance of climate tipping points, which refer to ‘a critical threshold at which a tiny perturbation can qualitatively alter the state or development of [the climate] system,’ and tipping elements, which are defined as ‘large-scale components of the Earth system that may pass a tipping point’ (both definitions from Lenton et al. 2008, 1786). A key feature of a tipping element is that current temperature affects the likelihood of a tipping element experiencing a tipping event—that is, a transition to an irreversible climate process, called a tipping process. Examples of tipping processes include the irreversible melting of the Greenland ice sheet, the collapse of the West Antarctic ice sheet, and the weakening of the Atlantic thermohaline circulation.” 17 See Richard Mahony and Diane Gargiulo, “The State of Climate Risk Disclosure: A Survey of US Companies,” White Paper (Chicago: Donnelley Financial Solutions, 2019), 
     - 5 - that even well-informed investors may underestimate the likelihood of large shocks related to climate.18  Combined with the uncertainty in the timing and magnitude of climate change itself, this mispricing could lead to financial volatility as conditions evolve and perceptions shift.   Consistent, comparable, and actionable disclosures are critical to understanding firms’ exposures to climate risks and to accurately pricing that risk.  The Task Force on Climate-Related Financial Disclosures (TCFD), a private sector-led initiative with support from the Financial Stability Board, provides a consistent global framework for companies and other organizations to improve standardization of climate-related financial disclosures.  As of October 2020, nearly 1,500 organizations with a combined market capitalization of $12.6 trillion, including financial institutions that own or manage assets of $150 trillion, had expressed their support for the TCFD framework.  This support signifies strong demand from the private sector and investors for greater transparency around climate-related risks to better inform decisionmaking.19  We are improving our understanding of climate risks and their impact on financial stability through staff research and engagement with other central banks on topics like climate scenario analysis.  One useful approach to assessing the effect of climate-related risks is through scenario analysis of how the financial system is exposed and how it may respond to climate-related risks.  Climate scenario analysis identifies climate-related                                                  https://www.dfinsolutions.com/sites/default/files/documents/2019-10/TCFD_II_Climate_Disclosure_V10_revisedFINAL.pdf.  18 See Harrison Hong, Frank Weikai, and Jiangmin Xu, “Climate risks and market efficiency,” Journal of Econometrics (October 2018), https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0304407618301817?via%3Dihub.  19 See Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures, 2020 Status Report (Basel: Financial Stability Board, September 2020), https://assets.bbhub.io/company/sites/60/2020/09/2020-TCFD_Status-Report.pdf.  
     - 6 - physical and transition risk factors facing financial firms, formulates appropriate stresses of those risk factors under different scenarios, and measures their effects on individual firms and the financial system as a whole.20  In part because of the different nature of climate-related risks relative to financial and economic downturns and the significantly longer planning horizon, this is distinct from established regulatory stress tests at banks, which are used to assess capital adequacy over a relatively short horizon. Measuring, Modelling, and Managing Climate Risk in the Banking System  Supervisors are responsible for ensuring that supervised institutions are resilient to all material risks, including those associated with climate change.  The economic and financial market consequences of climate change and the accompanying economic transition will have direct implications for bank balance sheets, strategies, and operations, and could increase credit, market, liquidity, or operational risk at banks.  These climate-related developments may affect the creditworthiness of corporate, household, and government borrowers.21  Climate-related risks may reduce a borrower’s repayment                                                  20 See Network for Greening the Financial System, Guide to Climate Scenario Analysis for Central Banks and Supervisors, June 2020, https://www.ngfs.net/sites/default/files/media/2020/06/29/ngfs_guide_scenario_analysis_final.pdf. The Bank Policy Institute has noted, “it is important that research continues in this area and that banks continue to make advancements in their internal scenario analysis” and that “banks, central banks and supervisors partner with the climate modelers to ensure that expertise is shared across the disciplines,” Francisco Covas, “Challenges in Stress Testing and Climate Change,” Bank Policy Institute, October 19, 2020, https://bpi.com/challenges-in-stress-testing-and-climate-change/. 21 For example, Barrot and Sauvagnat find that firms experience an average drop of 2 to 3 percentage points in sales growth following a major natural disaster that hits one of their suppliers. See  Jean-Noël Barrot and Julien Sauvagnat, “Input Specificity and the Propagation of Idiosyncratic Shocks in Production Networks,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics (August 2016): Vol. 131 No. 3, https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/131/3/1543/2461213.  Bernstein et al. find that homes exposed to sea level rise sell for approximately 7 percent less than equivalent unexposed properties.  See Asaf Bernstein, Matthew T. Gustafson, and Ryan Lewis, “Disaster on the Horizon: The Price Effect of Sea Level Rise,” Journal of Financial Economics 134 (November 2019), https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0304405X19300807.  Hsiang et al. find evidence that the poorest third of U.S. counties experience damages of up to 20 percent of county income as a result of climate change.  See Solomon Hsiang, Robert Kopp, Amir Jina, James Rising, Michael Delgado, Shashank Mohan, D.J. Rasmussen, Robert Muir-Wood, Paul Wilson, Michael Oppenheimer, Kate Larsen, and Trevor 
     - 7 - capacity or the value of assets collateralizing a loan, exposing banking institutions to losses.  Similarly, climate-related risks may impact the level and volatility of asset prices, thus affecting the value of a bank’s portfolios.  Severe weather events may disrupt a bank’s data centers or operations and impede its ability to provide financial services to customers.   Although the transmission channels through which climate risks affect banks are increasingly apparent, quantification of those risks remains challenging.  To date, measurement efforts have been hampered by data gaps and methodological hurdles, many of which are unique to climate change and contribute to elevated uncertainty in estimates of climate-related risks.  For instance, assessment of the potential impact of climate change on a bank may require precise data on the geolocation of a counterparty’s assets and operations, as well as information on local weather patterns for those locations.  It may also require knowledge of a counterparty’s carbon emissions and of policies in different industries and jurisdictions.  Data at this level of granularity are often unavailable or extremely difficult to acquire, presenting challenges in calculating the magnitude of climate-related financial risks.  Two-thirds of respondents to a recent survey of members of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision’s Task Force on Climate-Related Financial Risks (TFCR) indicated that they lack sufficiently granular or reliable data necessary to run climate risk assessment models.22                                                   Houser, “Estimating Economic Damage from Climate Change in the United States,” Science Magazine 356 (June 30, 2017), 1362 –1369, https://science.sciencemag.org/content/356/6345/1362/.  22 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, “Climate-related financial risks: a survey on current initiatives,” Survey (Basel: Bank for International Settlement, April 2020), https://www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d502.pdf.  
     - 8 - Filling these data gaps is critical for measuring the banking sector’s exposure to climate risk and analyzing the implications for financial stability and prudential risks.  Federal Reserve staff are participating in a new Network for Greening the Financial System (NGFS) workstream on “Bridging the Data Gaps.”  The workstream will create a detailed list of gaps in data items at the macroeconomic level, the market level, and the financial market participant level needed to model climate risk.23  Climate change also poses distinct modelling challenges.  The several decades over which climate risks are projected to materialize far exceed a bank’s typical risk management and planning time horizon.  Moreover, financial risk models are often backward-looking and extrapolate historical trends, which, in the case of climate, may be unreliable predicators of future outcomes.  New tools and forward-looking approaches will be required. 24  We continue to strengthen our understanding of how banks are measuring and managing climate risks.  Over time, it will be important to develop a framework for evaluating how banks are taking into account climate-related risk in their modelling and management of credit, market, liquidity, and operational risks.  Some jurisdictions have developed programs to provide banks with supervisory expectations to manage their risks associated with climate change.25  As a financial industry association has noted, “Climate                                                  23 Network for Greening the Financial System, “WS-Bridging the data gaps workstream: Mandate and workplan from April 2020 to April 2022,” September 3, 2020, https://www.ngfs.net/sites/default/files/media/2020/09/03/wsbdg_mandate_final.pdf.  24 See Kevin Stiroh, “Emerging Issues for Risk Managers” (remarks at GARP Global Risk Forum, New York, NY, November 17, 2019), https://www.newyorkfed.org/newsevents/speeches/2019/sti191107. 25 See, for example, Australian Prudential Regulation Authority Letter, “Understanding and managing the financial risks of climate change,” February 24, 2020, https://www.apra.gov.au/sites/default/files/2020-02/Understanding%20and%20managing%20the%20financial%20risks%20of%20climate%20change.pdf; Bank of England, Supervisory Statement | SS3/19 “Enhancing banks’ and insurers’ approaches to managing the financial risks from climate change,” April 2019, https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-
     - 9 - risk analysis and measurement is—rightly—rising quickly on both the industry and regulatory agenda. Both regulators and firms want to better understand risk profiles to ensure effective management of transition and physical risks as well as potential adequacy of financial resources.”26 We benefit from continued engagement both domestically and internationally with colleagues from other regulatory agencies, supervisory authorities, and international standard setting bodies.  For instance, the Federal Reserve co-chairs the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision’s TFCR.27  The TFCR is mapping the transmission channels and studying the measurement methodologies of climate-related financial risks to the banking system.  It will also examine the extent to which climate-related financial risks are incorporated in the existing Basel Framework.  Based on this analysis, the TFCR is charged with and is developing recommendations for effective supervisory practices to mitigate climate-related financial risks.28                                                    /media/boe/files/prudential-regulation/supervisory-statement/2019/ss319; Bank of England, Prudential Regulatory Agency Letter, “Managing the Financial Risks from Climate Change, July 19, 2020, https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/prudential-regulation/letter/2020/managing-the-financial-risks-from-climate-change.pdf?la=en&hash=A6B4DD1BE45B2762900F54B2F5BF2F99FA448424; and European Central Bank, Banking Supervision “Guide on climate-related and environmental risks: Supervisory expectations relating to risk management and disclosure,” November 2020, https://www.bankingsupervision.europa.eu/ecb/pub/pdf/ssm.202011finalguideonclimate-relatedandenvironmentalrisks~58213f6564.en.pdf. 26 Institute of International Finance Sustainable Finance Working Group, “Letter to the NGFS on Climate Risk Analysis and Measurement,” December 16, 2019, https://www.iif.com/Portals/0/Files/content/Regulatory/12162019_iif_sfwg_climate_letter_to_ngfs.pdf  27 See Kevin Stiroh, “The Basel Committee’s initiatives on climate-related financial risks” (remarks at the 2020 IIF Annual Membership Meeting, Basel, October 14, 2020), https://www.bis.org/speeches/sp201014.htm.  28 See Bank for International Settlements, “Basel Committee Publishes Stocktake Report on Climate-Related Financial Risk Initiatives,” news release, April 30, 2020, https://www.bis.org/press/p200430.htm.  
     - 10 - Climate Change and Community Reinvestment Financial institutions can also help communities and individuals build greater resilience to climate risk.  Recent research highlights the significant ways in which lower-income households and underserved areas are affected by natural disasters and climate risk.29  Lower-income households with low levels of liquid savings tend to be less resilient to the temporary loss of income, property damage, displacement costs, and health challenges they face from disasters. 30  In addition, low- and moderate-income (LMI) communities are often located in areas that are particularly vulnerable to climate-related risks, have greater health-related impacts due to climate change, or have housing that is more susceptible to disaster-related damage.31  Under the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA), banks have an affirmative obligation to meet the needs of their local communities, including LMI communities.  Existing CRA regulations allow banks to receive CRA credit for activities to revitalize                                                  29 See Federal Reserve Bank of New York, “Reducing Climate Risk for Low-Income Communities,” news release, November 19, 2020, https://www.newyorkfed.org/newsevents/events/regional_outreach/2020/1119-2020; and Jesse M. Keenan and Elizabeth Mattiuzzi, “Climate Adaptation Investment and the Community Reinvestment Act,” Community Development Research Briefs (June 16, 2019), https://www.frbsf.org/community-development/publications/community-development-research-briefs/2019/june/climate-adaptation-investment-and-the-community-reinvestment-act/.  See also “Record of Meeting: Community Advisory Council and Board of Governors,” Federal Reserve, last modified on November 1, 2019, https://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/files/cac-20191101.pdf. 30 See U.S. Global Research Program, Fourth National Climate Assessment, Volume II: Impacts, Risks, and Adaptation in the United States (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Global Change Research Program, 2018),  https://nca2018.globalchange.gov/; Patrick Sisson, “In Many Cities, Climate Change Will Flood Affordable Housing,” Bloomberg, December 1, 2020, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-12-01/how-climate-change-is-targeting-affordable-housing; and Eleanor Kruse and Richard V. Reeves, “Hurricanes hit the poor the hardest,” Brookings Institution, September 18, 2017, https://www.brookings.edu/blog/social-mobility-memos/2017/09/18/hurricanes-hit-the-poor-the-hardest/.  31 In the global development context, see Lael Brainard, Abigail Jones, and Nigel Purvis, Climate Change and Global Poverty: a Billion Lives in the Balance (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press, 2009). See also Department of Treasury, “U.S. Takes a Significant Step Toward a Clean Energy Future,” news release, October 29, 2013, https://www.treasury.gov/press-center/press-releases/Pages/jl2195.aspx.  
     - 11 - and stabilize communities after a natural disaster has occurred in certain federally designated disaster areas.32  For natural disasters that have caused widespread devastation and economic impact, such as Hurricanes Katrina and Maria, the Board has worked with other banking regulators to provide CRA consideration for bank investments in stabilization and revitalization outside of a bank’s assessment area or regional area.33   It is important to LMI communities and other underserved communities to be proactive in working to equitably mitigate the risks of climate change in advance.  Reflecting this, the Federal Reserve’s recent advance notice of proposed rulemaking on the CRA for the first time seeks feedback on providing CRA credit to encourage loans and investments that promote disaster preparedness and climate resilience.34  We want to encourage lenders to invest and rebuild in ways that will increase resilience to future climate risks in underserved and local LMI communities.  We look forward to receiving comment on our questions regarding disaster preparedness and climate resilience by the February 16, 2021, deadline.35                                                  32 See 12 CFR 228.12(g); and Kevin Dancy, “Weathering the Storm: A Framework for Meeting CRA Obligations,” Community Development Publication (August 2018), https://www.dallasfed.org/cd/pubs/storm.aspx.  33 CA 06-5, CRA Consideration for Community Development Activities in Hurricanes Rita and Katrina Disaster Areas, February 24, 2006,  https://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/caletters/2006/0605/caltr0605.htm; CA 18-1, CRA Consideration for Community Development Activities in the U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico Following Hurricane Maria, January 25, 2018, https://www.federalreserve.gov/supervisionreg/caletters/CA%2018-1%20Hurricane%20Maria.pdf. 34 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve, “Federal Reserve Board issues Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking on an approach to modernize regulations that implement the Community Reinvestment Act,” news release, September 21, 2020, https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/bcreg20200921a.htm. 35 See “Electronic Comment Form,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, last modified on February 24, 2012, https://www.federalreserve.gov/secure/forms/ElectronicCommentForm.aspx?doc_id=R-1723&doc_ver=1.  Comments may also be submitted by email to regs.comments@federalreserve.gov and include docket (R-1723) and RIN numbers (7100-AF94) in the subject line of the message.  
     - 12 - Looking Ahead A year ago, I laid out some of the important areas where climate change matters for the Federal Reserve’s statutory responsibilities.36  The Federal Reserve has been making important progress in laying the groundwork to incorporate climate considerations where they are material and relevant to our statutory responsibilities, today and in the future.  Across the Federal Reserve System, we have sought to deepen our understanding of the implications of climate change for the U.S. economy and financial system, including through the Virtual Seminar on Climate Economics series, internal groups focused on the emerging climate literature, and academic conferences at several Federal Reserve Banks.37  Federal Reserve staff are collaborating and sharing knowledge through our System Climate Network and other forums.  We have recruited economists with expertise in climate-related topics and obtained a variety of climate-related data resources.                                                  36 See Lael Brainard, “Why Climate Change Matters for Monetary Policy and Financial Stability” (remarks at “The Economics of Climate Change” Research Conference, San Francisco, CA, November 8, 2019), https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/brainard20191108a.htm. See also Mary Daly, “Why Climate Change Matters to Us” (remarks at “The Economics of Climate Change” Research Conference, San Francisco, CA, November 8, 2019), https://www.frbsf.org/our-district/press/presidents-speeches/mary-c-daly/2019/november/why-climate-change-matters-to-us/ and Glenn D. Rudebusch, “Climate Change and the Federal Reserve,” (FRBSF Economic Letter, March 25, 2019), https://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic-letter/2019/march/climate-change-and-federal-reserve/.   37 See “Economic Risks of Climate Change: Implications for Financial Regulators,” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, last modified on December 4, 2020, https://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/events/2020/december/economic-risks-of-climate-change-implications-for-financial-regulators; Federal Reserve Bank of New York, “Reducing Climate Risk for Low-Income Communities,” press release, November 19, 2020, https://www.newyorkfed.org/newsevents/events/regional_outreach/2020/1119-2020; “Virtual Seminar on Climate Economics,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond,  https://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/events/virtual-seminar-on-climate-economics; “Climate Change Economics,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, last modified on November 20, 2020, https://www.richmondfed.org/conferences_and_events/2020/20201119_climate_change; and Galina B. Hale, Òscar Jordà, and Glenn D. Rudebusch, “The Economics of Climate Change: A First Fed Conference” (December 2019), https://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic-letter/2019/december/economics-climate-change-first-fed-conference/. 
     - 13 - Last month, the Federal Reserve Financial Stability Report incorporated for the first time an analysis of the ways climate change could present risks to financial stability.38  Similarly, the Federal Reserve Supervision and Regulation Report described how climate-related risks can create microprudential risks and how supervisors are working to better understand, measure, and mitigate these risks.39  Last quarter, the Federal Reserve released a CRA proposal that for the first time highlighted the importance of investing in climate resilience for LMI and underserved communities. Building on this foundation, this week the Federal Reserve Board became a full member of the NGFS.  We look forward to learning from and collaborating with foreign central banks on addressing data gaps and undertaking research on the implications of climate change for financial stability and the economy.40   In the years ahead, there will be significant opportunities for collaboration across the U.S. regulatory agencies in strengthening the U.S. financial system to meet the challenge of climate change.  Together, these efforts can help equip the deepest financial market in the world to support our dynamic private sector in assessing and addressing climate-related risks and investing in the transition.                                                  38 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Financial Stability Report (Washington: Board of Governors, November 2020), https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/2020-november-financial-stability-report-purpose.htm.  39 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Supervision and Regulation Report (Washington: Board of Governors, November 2020), https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/files/202011-supervision-and-regulation-report.pdf.  40 A statement from several U.S. banks notes, “We agree… that the U.S. should join the Network for Greening the Financial System, so that U.S. financial regulators can leverage the shared learning of the international regulatory community in developing the appropriate approach to managing climate risk in the U.S. financial system.” Citi, JP Morgan, and Morgan Stanley Joint Statement on CFTC Climate Report, September 2020, https://cftc.gov/sites/default/files/2020-09/Citi%20-%20JP%20Morgan%20-%20Morgan%20Stanley%20Joint%20Statement%20re%20Managing%20Climate%20Risk%20in%20the%20U.S.%20Financial%20System.pdf.    
12/21/2020The potential long-term effects of the coronavirus crisis on the economy and on monetary policy | Deutsche Bundesbankhttps://www.bundesbank.de/en/press/speeches/the-potential-long-term-effects-of-the-coronavirus-crisis-on-the-economy-and-on-monetary-policy-855…1/1416.12.2020 | Virtual Event | Jens WeidmannThe potential long-term effects of the coronavirus crisis on theeconomy and on monetary policySpeech at the Humboldt University of Berlin1 Introduction2 Economic consequences of the coronavirus crisis2.1 German economy2.2 Risk of deglobalisation2.3 Education2.4 Public ﬁnances3 Monetary policy3.1 Monetary policy during the pandemic crisis3.2 Risk of ﬁscal dominance3.3 Independence and mandate of central banks3.3.1 Problem of time inconsistency3.3.2 Independence in times of low inﬂation3.3.3 Narrow interpretation of the mandate4 Climate action and central banks5 Conclusion
12/21/2020The potential long-term effects of the coronavirus crisis on the economy and on monetary policy | Deutsche Bundesbankhttps://www.bundesbank.de/en/press/speeches/the-potential-long-term-effects-of-the-coronavirus-crisis-on-the-economy-and-on-monetary-policy-855…2/141 IntroductionLadies and gentlemen,I would have been more than delighted to have delivered this speech – as was originally planned – inthe historical Chapel of the Holy Ghost in Berlin. Unfortunately, that plan – like so many others – hasbeen thwarted by the pandemic. But I am glad that we can exchange views today at least in a virtualformat.The Wirt schafts wis sen schaft li che Ge sell schaft, the society of the School of Business and Economics atthe Humboldt University, is celebrating its 25th anniversary this year. And I would like to heartilycongratulate its members to mark this occasion. At the beginning of the society, one foundingmember was a prominent Bun des ban ker, namely Helmut Schlesinger. He was President of the Deut ‐sche Bun des bank from 1991 to 1993 and, before that, he had held numerous posts at the Bank andits predecessor institution, the Bank deut scher Län der, over a period of almost four decades here inFrankfurt.Another distinguished person who belonged to the society and its Board of Trustees was ProfessorReinhard Selten. So far, he is the only German who has been awarded the Nobel prize in economics,which was for his work on game theory. Reinhard Selten studied in Frankfurt and then began his ﬁrstfull professorship teaching in Berlin. Four years later, I attended his lectures on game theory in Bonnand earned a little extra money taking part in the institution’s experiments.In my speech today, I would like not only to build a bridge from Frankfurt to Berlin but also a bridgelinking game theory to monetary policy. One well-known example of game theory is the “chickengame”. Perhaps you know it from the ﬁlm “Rebel Without a Cause”? Jim, played by James Dean, andanother teenager, Buzz, are racing in stolen cars towards a cliff; whoever jumps out ﬁrst is chicken.Fortunately, most economic games are less dangerous for life and limb. That is because game theorypermits insights wherever people interact, pursue different objectives and make decisions that affecteach other. That is also true of monetary policy, which stands in relationships with a large number ofeconomic agents – with the ﬁnancial markets, say, when it’s about interest rate expectations; withﬁrms and employees, when they form their expectations about inﬂation and wage growth, and alsowith ﬁscal policy.We shall come across interactions of this kind during the course of my speech. The economicconsequences of the coronavirus crisis will be at the forefront to begin with. Here, I would like to talkabout the long-term risk of deglobalisation as well as the possible effects of school closuresworldwide, before coming to monetary policy.2 Economic consequences of the coronavirus crisis2.1 German economy
12/21/2020The potential long-term effects of the coronavirus crisis on the economy and on monetary policy | Deutsche Bundesbankhttps://www.bundesbank.de/en/press/speeches/the-potential-long-term-effects-of-the-coronavirus-crisis-on-the-economy-and-on-monetary-policy-855…3/14In saying this, one thing is clear: the pandemic is, ﬁrst and foremost, a global health crisis, which hasto be mastered as a matter of urgency. Too many people have already died, many more are seriouslyill. The pandemic has also led to an economic slump that is without parallel in our time. In springalone, German economic output shrank by almost one-tenth.When infections rates were contained and the protective measures were relaxed, the economystarted to recover. In summer, German economic growth was in fact a lot stronger than originallyexpected. With the second wave of infections, there is now a danger of a setback in the short term.This makes clear how crucial it is for the economic recovery, too, that the pandemic is contained on asustained basis and, ultimately, overcome. The reports about vaccines give cause for optimism.The Bun des bank’s economic experts presented their forecast at the end of last week and weretherefore unable to take into account the latest stricter protective measures. This means that, overthe short term, the German economy could be put under a somewhat greater strain than estimatedin the forecast. Nevertheless, from the present perspective, it is still plausible to assume that medicaladvances from spring 2021 onwards will make it possible to relax the containment measures. Therecovery is then likely to pick up speed again. In line with this, the German economy can still reach itspre-crisis level in early 2022, as expected in the projection.In this scenario, the long-term harm to the economy would, if anything, be relatively limited, notleast thanks to the comprehensive government support measures. Having said that, the latest eventsillustrate the high level of uncertainty about the evolution of the pandemic and its economic fallout.In an unfavourable scenario, the German economy would not be returning to its pre-crisis levelbefore the end of 2023 and would suffer considerable long-term damage.Added to all of that, there might be an acceleration of developments that impair the performance ofthe economy beyond conventional horizons and interfere with medium-term risk assessments. Thisincludes the risk of an increasing market concentration and declining innovation dynamics, but alsothe risk of deglobalisation.2.2 Risk of deglobalisationThat is because border closures and other containment measures in spring interrupted many value-added chains; conveyor belts were standing still. In light of this experience, it would seem theobvious thing to do for ﬁrms to shorten their international supply chains and repatriate production inorder to strengthen their resilience and the security of goods ﬂows.At all events, one study blames one-quarter of the economic slump brought about by the “pandemicshock” on spillover effects through supply chains. However, the study also makes clear that anyonetrusting solely in domestic production would not necessarily have emerged from the crisis in a bettershape, but would have been hit harder by the containment measures at home instead.[1][2]
12/21/2020The potential long-term effects of the coronavirus crisis on the economy and on monetary policy | Deutsche Bundesbankhttps://www.bundesbank.de/en/press/speeches/the-potential-long-term-effects-of-the-coronavirus-crisis-on-the-economy-and-on-monetary-policy-855…4/14The economist Richard Baldwin put it in a nutshell: “Putting all your eggs in one basket does notdiversify risk – even if the basket is at home.” You see, global value-added chains are notinherently risky. Rather, they provide an opportunity to reduce dependencies on individual suppliers orlocations.That is the reason why there are more enterprises at present working on diversifying their supplychains than on shortening them, as is shown by an international survey among more than 10,000ﬁrms. In this way, they can also use the advantages of regional specialisation and pass them onto consumers in the form of lower prices or greater choice.There nevertheless exists the danger of the pandemic reinforcing protectionist tendencies. Over thepast few years, there has been a strain on global trade due, in particular, to the dispute between theUnited States and China. The rationale behind such a trade conﬂict is often to get gain an edge at theexpense of others.The situation is similar to that of the familiar prisoner's dilemma in game theory. Imagine Chicago inthe roaring twenties. Two gangland bosses are accused of being in cahoots and having committedvery serious crimes together. They are interrogated separately. Whoever admits guilt and turns state’sevidence will be immune from prosecution, whereas the other will feel the full force of the law. Ifthey both confess, the penalty will be reduced somewhat. If they both remain silent, they will bejailed for tax evasion – a much less severe punishment – as eventually happened with Al Capone. Inthis situation, it pays for each one individually to confess. That is why they the two of them will bepunished severely in the end, even though it would have been better for both of them if neither ofthem had said anything.There is the threat of a similar outcome with protectionism. It is true that duties distort the structureof production, thus reducing global trade overall. But a single large country might hope to gain anadvantage if the trading partner lowers its export prices and thus ultimately bears the customs duty.It then pays for the trading partner, however, to reduce its losses by raising duties and preventing theshift in trade prices. This means that everyone is worse off in the end.In actual fact, analyses suggest that there are only losers in the trade conﬂict between the UnitedStates and China. They indicate that Chinese suppliers are not prepared to make major priceconcessions, which is why US ﬁrms and consumers had to the bear the main burden of the duties. Nor was the reduction in bilateral trade ﬂows offset to a signiﬁcant extent by more trade withother partners. A Bun des bank study looked in vain for who had the “last laugh” in this conﬂict, forexample. Instead, the dispute led worldwide to greater uncertainty, and dampened thepropensity to invest and trade. And even leaving aside such uncertainty effects, Bun des bank analyseshighlight the potential harm: if the duties remain in place, the size of the US and Chinese economieswould shrink by up to ½%; the size of the global economy would shrink by ¼% overall.[3][4][5][6][7]
12/21/2020The potential long-term effects of the coronavirus crisis on the economy and on monetary policy | Deutsche Bundesbankhttps://www.bundesbank.de/en/press/speeches/the-potential-long-term-effects-of-the-coronavirus-crisis-on-the-economy-and-on-monetary-policy-855…5/14This shows how important it is to keep markets open or make them more open. On the other hand,in globalisation, too, there are not just winners. It is true that, taken as a whole, world trade and theinternational division of labour boost the prosperity of national economies. But not everyone beneﬁtsalike. That is because there is a shift in relative prices and wages, jobs can be lost while newemployment opportunities arise elsewhere. It is therefore, for one thing, important to alleviate socialhardships with an appropriate transfer system. For another, education is key so that as many peopleas possible are able to beneﬁt from the opportunities afforded by open markets as well as newtechnologies.2.3 EducationAt the same time, education is a further area that has been severely affected by the coronavirus crisis.Most countries have temporarily closed schools and other educational establishments. At the peak,UNESCO data show 90% of all school pupils being affected worldwide.Even brief school closures can impair the acquisition of knowledge and the development of cognitiveskills. Furthermore, learning less can also mean a lower income later on – for an entire lifetime.The World Bank, for example, estimates that an assumed loss of half a year of (quality adjusted)school education could reduce the expected life income of the affected schoolchildren by 5% on aglobal average.Children in developing countries are likely to be suffering most. First, even under normalcircumstances, they go to school for a considerably shorter period than in the developed nations.Second, the facilities for remote learning are often much poorer. E-learning, in particular, issomething that can be accessed only by parts of the population in developing countries. This alsoharbours the danger of economic inequality within countries becoming worse. In particular, there is arisk of young people from poorer families no longer being able to keep up in their classes, settingtheir sights lower, or even dropping out of school altogether.It is therefore vital to catch up on education worldwide and to continue motivating schoolchildren togo on learning. That could also necessitate higher spending on education.2.4 Public financesAbove and beyond the pressing tasks we face, I envisage Germany’s ﬁscal policy being confrontedwith three major challenges in the long term. First – and also foremost – it needs to supportsustainable growth by promoting not only education but also digital transformation and thetransition to a climate-neutral economy. Second, the ﬁnancial costs of an ageing society need to beshouldered. And third, the government needs to once again ﬁnancially brace itself for future crises.I say this because, right now, we can see how important it is for governments to be capable of takingaction. In the current crisis, it is largely ﬁscal policymakers who have been called upon to act, as theyare the ones who can provide ﬁnancial support to people and businesses where it is needed – by[8][9][10][11]
12/21/2020The potential long-term effects of the coronavirus crisis on the economy and on monetary policy | Deutsche Bundesbankhttps://www.bundesbank.de/en/press/speeches/the-potential-long-term-effects-of-the-coronavirus-crisis-on-the-economy-and-on-monetary-policy-855…6/14means of transfers, to give an example. It was ﬁscal policymakers’ determined and broad interventionthat played a substantial role in averting a downward spiral in the economy.It is clear that the provision of ﬁscal support on a massive scale during this crisis was, and still is, theright decision. Without this assistance for businesses and households, the economy would probablyhave experienced a far more severe downturn, which, in the end, would probably have hitgovernment coffers much harder than is already the case.The coronavirus crisis is indeed taking a heavy toll on public ﬁnances. For example, according to theEuropean Commission’s Autumn 2020 Economic Forecast, the euro area aggregate debt-to-GDP ratiois projected to jump by 16 percentage points this year – to over 100%.Against this backdrop, the government needs to create suﬃcient ﬁscal space once the crisis haspassed so that it is in a position to overcome these three long-term challenges. Crisis measures thusneed to be time-limited so that deﬁcits can recede automatically in the post-crisis period.3 Monetary policy3.1 Monetary policy during the pandemic crisisWhilst, on this occasion, it is ﬁscal policymakers who are on the frontlines tackling the economicfallout from the crisis, central banks also have a role to play. Given that the economic downturn isadversely affecting the inﬂation outlook, an accommodative monetary policy stance is crucial.Additionally, insuﬃcient liquidity in the ﬁnancial system could further exacerbate the economicdownturn and ultimately put the objective of price stability at risk.Such being the case, the ECB Governing Council responded decisively back in March already – with awhole raft of monetary policy measures. These focused on the ECB’s bond purchase programmes, inparticular, with the Governing Council not only increasing purchases under the asset purchaseprogramme (APP), which has been running since 2015, but also launching a pandemic emergencypurchase programme, or PEPP for short.My fundamental scepticism regarding large-scale government bond purchases is nothing new. Inparticular, they pose the threat of blurring the line between monetary and ﬁscal policy – the all-important boundary for the monetary union. In order to curb such risks, the ECB Governing Councilincorporated essential guarantees and safeguards into the public sector purchase programme (PSPP)set up in 2015. Their aim is to help prevent monetary policymakers from creating misguidedincentives for government ﬁnances and steering too close to monetary ﬁnancing of governments.Nevertheless, the Eurosystem central banks have become the Member States’ biggest creditors, andthat was even before the pandemic started. The interest on the government bonds that are on ourbalance sheets ﬂows to central banks and then back to our treasuries as part of our proﬁt. Thismeans that, for this part of sovereign debt, the funding costs are uncoupled from the capital market.
12/21/2020The potential long-term effects of the coronavirus crisis on the economy and on monetary policy | Deutsche Bundesbankhttps://www.bundesbank.de/en/press/speeches/the-potential-long-term-effects-of-the-coronavirus-crisis-on-the-economy-and-on-monetary-policy-855…7/14As a result, large swaths of sovereign debt are not subject to the disciplining effect of the market.In my opinion, the risks associated with government bond purchases are great. However, it isgenerally agreed that asset purchases can be a legitimate and effective monetary policy tool. Withthat in mind, monetary policymakers need to take into account and constantly weigh up the reasonfor using an instrument and its desired effects versus its potential undesirable side effects.Even – and especially – in times of crisis, monetary policy depends on three things: the appropriatescale, the right choice of instruments and clever programme design. These are the subject of intensedebate in the ECB Governing Council, and the trade-offs can also vary.There has certainly been a need for monetary policy action in recent times. According to our forecast,medium-term inﬂation in the euro area has decreased again due to the pandemic.However, what is important to me is that the share of outstanding government bonds held by centralbanks does not become too large. Otherwise, we would be running the risk of gaining a dominantmarket inﬂuence and smoothing out the differences in risk premia for government bonds, and thusweakening market discipline still further. This problem, in particular, is being exacerbated once moreby the recent expansion of the PEPP.When this programme was introduced, it was just as important to me that it have a time limit and beclearly linked to the crisis. As per the Governing Council's most recent decisions, net asset purchasesunder the PEPP will continue until at least the end of March 2022. We need to ensure that themonetary policy emergency measures do not become a permanent ﬁxture: they have to be scaledback once the crisis ends.One other thing also needs to be clear: monetary policy as a whole must be normalised if theinﬂation outlook requires this. However, it may become increasingly diﬃcult for central banks to exitfrom their accommodative monetary policy in a timely manner, as higher interest rates are not likelyto be to everyone’s taste.3.2 Risk of fiscal dominanceGiven the increased levels of debt, monetary policymakers could subsequently face growing pressureto keep interest rates low for longer. This would give rise to the threat of ﬁscal dominance, aseconomist Michael Woodford calls it, which he deﬁnes as pressure on the central bank to usemonetary policy to maintain the market value of government debt.A dangerous dynamic could be introduced into the regime. If ﬁscal policymakers expect monetarypolicymakers to ultimately jump to the rescue, they might take the sustainability of public ﬁnances forgranted and accumulate more debt. This would potentially put the central bank under even greaterpressure further down the road, and it would be even harder for it to withstand this pressure. If thecentral bank then gives in to the pressure, the usual roles could be reversed: if monetary policy issafeguarding sovereign solvency, it is ultimately ﬁscal policy requirements that will determine the levelofinﬂation[12]
12/21/2020The potential long-term effects of the coronavirus crisis on the economy and on monetary policy | Deutsche Bundesbankhttps://www.bundesbank.de/en/press/speeches/the-potential-long-term-effects-of-the-coronavirus-crisis-on-the-economy-and-on-monetary-policy-855…8/14of inﬂation. Meanwhile, we are already hearing the odd murmur from those who want to go far beyond what isdescribed in Woodford’s deﬁnition, with some even going so far to say that the Eurosystem shouldforgive sovereign debt. This demand will no doubt sound extreme and misguided, particularly since itis a violation of the European treaties. However, it underscores the fact that the fundamental dangerof ﬁscal dominance should not be ignored.When two parties are wrestling for the upper hand, game theory can model a variety of interactions.For example, the interplay between monetary and ﬁscal policy can be modelled as unfolding like agame of chicken, as I have already mentioned.The musical ﬁlm “Footloose” (released in 1984) shows us one way in which an unfavourable outcomecan be avoided in a particular variation on this game. A young Kevin Bacon and his opponent aredriving tractors towards each other on a narrow dirt road. Kevin Bacon decides to jump from thetractor to save himself from harm. However, his shoelace becomes tangled around the pedal. Luckily,his opponent realises that he can no longer win and he jumps instead. Even though chance is at playhere, the shoelace still makes one thing clear: players can avoid undesirable outcomes by making acredible commitment.In this context, central banks need to be committed to the objective of price stability. In order toavoid fuelling false expectations, central banks therefore need to make the following clear today: ifthe inﬂation outlook calls for monetary policy normalisation, there can be no avoiding it out ofconsideration for government borrowing costs.Furthermore, game theory can also demonstrate that ﬁscal policy needs to be committed in acredible manner. This is because, for the reasons just mentioned, monetary policy is dependenton sound ﬁscal policy in order to be able to safeguard price stability in the long term. This is whycredible ﬁscal rules are so important and an integral part of monetary union.Monetary policy therefore requires a solid foundation that it cannot lay itself. The second cornerstoneof this foundation – in addition to sustainable public ﬁnances – is the independence and the clearmandate of monetary policymakers.3.3 Independence and mandate of central banks3.3.1 Problem of time inconsistencyWhilst a government-controlled central bank could also make a pledge to safeguard price stability, itmight have an incentive to deviate from its promise at a later date and pursue other politicalobjectives. In particular, the inﬂuenced central bank could try to reduce unemployment by means ofunanticipated inﬂation.But people and businesses cannot be deceived in the long run. They see through the decision-makers’ incentives and adjust their inﬂation expectations, wages and prices upwards. As a result,[13][14]
12/21/2020The potential long-term effects of the coronavirus crisis on the economy and on monetary policy | Deutsche Bundesbankhttps://www.bundesbank.de/en/press/speeches/the-potential-long-term-effects-of-the-coronavirus-crisis-on-the-economy-and-on-monetary-policy-855…9/14inﬂation rises without a fall in unemployment.This inﬂation bias is just one example of the problem of time inconsistency, which was identiﬁed byNobel Prize winners Finn Kydland and Edward Prescott in various economic policy decisions.This problem arises when policymakers move away from plans they have previously announced if it isthe optimal strategy for them and they have the opportunity to do so. Kydland and Prescott derivedthis problem of time inconsistency theoretically over forty years ago and, in doing so, also made useof some of the ﬁndings made by Reinhard Selten. The inﬂation bias corresponded to the highinﬂation of the 1970s, when independent central banks were still the exception. To overcome it, thecentral banks were, for all practical purposes, delegated the task of safeguarding price stability, andin return they were granted independence.Indeed, numerous empirical studies over the past few decades have shown a negative correlationbetween inﬂation and central bank independence – a strong indication that independent centralbanks are in a better position to safeguard price stability than others.3.3.2 Independence in times of low inflationDespite this, the independence of central banks has been called into question, particularly in recentyears. Some appear to believe it has become superﬂuous in a world of low inﬂation, as monetary andﬁscal policy are, in any case, working towards the same end. They should therefore coordinate theirefforts more closely.However, this argument fails to take into account two factors. First, it would be dangerous to assumethat weakened independence would not affect inﬂation. As a recent study by the ECB highlights, theproblem of time inconsistency does not simply disappear in a low inﬂation setting. StanleyFischer, former Vice-Chairman of the Federal Reserve, put it as follows: “[…] The concern over theeffects of political interference in monetary policy remains as valid in practice when inﬂation is toolow as when inﬂation is too high. That is primarily because political horizons are typically shorter thanthose that need to be taken into account in making monetary policy decisions.”Yet those who doubt the value of independence also overlook a second point; namely that if inﬂationrises, monetary and ﬁscal policy objectives may diverge again. The latest edition of the magazine“The Economist” sounds out the arguments suggesting that an era of renewed higher inﬂation is onthe horizon. From the journalists’ perspective, these arguments are far from overwhelming, but theyare not without substance either. For example, former central banker Charles Goodhart stressesthat demographic shifts could reduce the global labour supply in future, resulting in higher wages,inﬂation and interest rates. He warns against turning a blind eye to the potential risk ofinﬂation.In my view, one thing is clear: we should not fall prey to the illusion that monetary and ﬁscal policywill always pull together. The independence of central banks has lost none of its signiﬁcance.3.3.3 Narrow interpretation of the mandate[15][16][17][18][19][20][21][22]
12/21/2020The potential long-term effects of the coronavirus crisis on the economy and on monetary policy | Deutsche Bundesbankhttps://www.bundesbank.de/en/press/speeches/the-potential-long-term-effects-of-the-coronavirus-crisis-on-the-economy-and-on-monetary-policy-85…10/14Aside from doubt surrounding the beneﬁts of independence, there is also an argument that derivesfrom the principle of democracy. In a democracy, the independence of a state institution is, afterall, the exception. This independence has been deliberately granted to us for monetary policy so thatwe can fulﬁl our mandate free from political inﬂuence. However, we as central banks do not set ourown mandate; rather, it is enshrined in the European treaties. As Otmar Issing succinctly put it: “Thecentral banks were not given independence in order to extend their own mandates.”I am convinced that independence and a narrow interpretation of the mandate go hand-in-hand.They are the two sides of the same coin. The more broadly central banks interpret their monetarypolicy mandate, the more likely they are to become enmeshed in politics and be overwhelmed withan ever-growing list of new desires and objectives. Sooner or later, their independence would becalled into question – and rightly so, in my view. This path would do a disservice to price stability.One of the secrets of success for an independent monetary policy is recognising and respecting one’sown limitations. This also means keeping the required distance from ﬁscal policy. The same applies toeconomic policy and climate policy.4 Climate action and central banksIn recent times, the Eurosystem has repeatedly been called upon to play an active role in combatingclimate change. One particularly frequent proposal is that we should favour “green” securities as partof our monetary policy and no longer buy bonds issued by carbon-intensive enterprises.However, it is not our task as a central bank to penalise or subsidise certain industries. Such decisionssigniﬁcantly alter the distribution of resources and income and thus require strong democraticlegitimacy. Climate policy is therefore the task of elected governments and parliaments. They alsohave the appropriate instruments at their disposal to solve the underlying economic problem, such astaxes or emissions trading.That decisive economic policy action is needed here is clear and has long been recognised ineconomic theory, making reference to the tragedy of the commons: a resource that is freely availablebut ﬁnite will end up being used too much. Overﬁshing is a clear example of this. If ﬁshermen haveunrestricted access to the sea, everyone will want to net as many ﬁsh as possible without consideringthe interests of other ﬁshermen or future generations of ﬁshermen. The risk of overﬁshing will thenemerge in the long run, with negative consequences for everyone – which brings to mind once againthe classic prisoner’s dilemma. In such situations, it falls to the government to intervene. For instance,a tax puts a price on the consequences of our actions and creates an incentive for us to change ourbehaviour.Winston Churchill is thought to have once said: “If you put two economists in a room, you get twoopinions, unless one of them is Lord Keynes, in which case you get three opinions.” On the subject ofclimate change, however, economists are largely of one accord: in order to curb it, a higher price for[23][24]
12/21/2020The potential long-term effects of the coronavirus crisis on the economy and on monetary policy | Deutsche Bundesbankhttps://www.bundesbank.de/en/press/speeches/the-potential-long-term-effects-of-the-coronavirus-crisis-on-the-economy-and-on-monetary-policy-85…11/14carbon emissions is crucial. Monetary policy is not a suitable substitute for an ambitious carbon priceand a consistent, credible climate policy.The imperative for monetary policy is to safeguard price stability. During an economic crisis such asthe one we are currently experiencing, this means supporting the economy as a whole throughfavourable ﬁnancing conditions. Our purchase programmes for private securities are broadly gearedto the market accordingly.Studies show that these programmes serve their purpose and reduce ﬁnancing costs for the economyas a whole. They thus affect not only the prices and yields of the bonds purchased, but also those ofnon-eligible securities, because our purchases cause investors to turn to other, more riskyinvestments. Therefore, when purchase programmes are speciﬁcally used to manage certain marketyields, the effect of this should not be overstated.And here, too, we should not turn a blind eye to potential conﬂicts of interest. The Eurosystem willhave to reduce its asset purchases or holdings if this is necessary for price stability. However, progressmust then also continue to be made in the transition to a climate-neutral economy.In my view, there is no question that climate protection poses one of the greatest challenges of ourtime, and that action cannot be delayed. All of us can and should do more, including central banks.Above all, we need to better understand the implications climate change may have for monetarypolicy, because we have to be able to maintain price stability in the future, too.Central banks are also required to take action if climate change or climate policy engenders ﬁnancialrisk. In banking supervision and when monitoring ﬁnancial stability, we must ensure that creditinstitutions take suﬃcient account of such risks in their risk management.However, climate-related ﬁnancial risks can also affect central banks’ ﬁnancial assets, which is whywe should also incorporate them into our risk management. This is particularly true with regard tothe monetary policy portfolios. Here, it is legitimate to provide climate-relevant information fromsecurities issuers and rating agencies. I feel that in the context of monetary policy, the Eurosystemshould consider the approach of purchasing or accepting as collateral only those securities whoseissuers meet certain climate-related reporting requirements. In addition, we could consider using onlythe ratings of agencies that adequately take account of climate-related ﬁnancial risks.This would mean that, above and beyond their own risk management, central banks could improvethe level of information available and act as a catalyst for change in the ﬁnancial system. At the sametime, the Eurosystem would then be able to support climate policies in the EU with no potentialconﬂict between this and its own tasks.5 ConclusionLadies and gentlemen,[25]
12/21/2020The potential long-term effects of the coronavirus crisis on the economy and on monetary policy | Deutsche Bundesbankhttps://www.bundesbank.de/en/press/speeches/the-potential-long-term-effects-of-the-coronavirus-crisis-on-the-economy-and-on-monetary-policy-85…12/14adesadgetee,Economist John McMillan said that “Experience teaches you to see the trees; game theory helps youto see the forest.” I’ll sum up my remarks now, while you can still see the forest for the trees.Game theory enhances our awareness of the interplay between different expectations and strategiesin the economy – between individual policymakers as well as between policymakers and privateagents.The coronavirus crisis is, without a doubt, making almost unprecedented demands on ﬁscal,economic and monetary policy. These crisis efforts should not ignore the fact that different policyareas have a primary commitment to different objectives. In order to ensure that this interplayultimately serves the common good, it is, above all, important not to blur the boundaries betweenthe responsibilities of individual policy areas and not to overburden monetary policy.Paul Volcker, who, as the Chairman of the Fed at that time, brought the Great Inﬂation of the 1970sunder control in the United States, summed it up thus: “Asked to do too much – for example, toaccommodate misguided ﬁscal policies, to deal with structural imbalances, or to square continuouslythe hypothetical circles of stability, growth, and full employment – [the central bank] will inevitablyfall short. If in the process of trying it loses sight of its basic responsibility for price stability, [...] thenthose other goals will be beyond reach.”Thank you very much for your attention. Fußnoten:Deut sche Bun des bank (2020), Outlook for the German economy for 2021 to 2023, MonthlyReport, December 2020, pp. (pages)1.Bonadio, B., Z. Huo, A. A. Levchenko and N. Pandalai-Nayar (2020), Global Supply Chains in thePandemic, CEPR Discussion Paper, No 14766.2.Baldwin, R. and R. Freeman (2020), Trade conﬂict in the age of Covid-19, VoxEU,https://voxeu.org/article/trade-conﬂict-age-covid-193.HSBC (2020), Navigator: Now, next and how for business,https://www.business.hsbc.com/navigator4.See Deut sche Bun des bank (2017), The danger posed to the global economy by protectionisttendencies, Monthly Report, July 2017, pp. (pages) 77-91.5.M. Amiti, S. (Seite) J. Redding and D. E. Weinstein (2019), The Impact of the 2018 Tariffs on Pricesand Welfare, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. (Volume) 33, pp. (pages) 187-210; A. Cavallo,G. Gopinath, B. Neiman and J. Tang (2019), Tariff Passthrough at the Border and at the Store:Evidence from US Trade Policy, NBER Working Paper, No 26396; P. D. Fajgelbaum, P. K. Goldberg,P. J. Kennedy and A. K. Khandelwal (2020), The Return to Protectionism, Quarterly Journal ofEconomics, Vol. (Volume) 135, pp. (pages) 1-55.6.Deut sche Bun des bank, Consequences of increasing protectionism, Monthly Report, January 2020,pp45667.[26][27]
12/21/2020The potential long-term effects of the coronavirus crisis on the economy and on monetary policy | Deutsche Bundesbankhttps://www.bundesbank.de/en/press/speeches/the-potential-long-term-effects-of-the-coronavirus-crisis-on-the-economy-and-on-monetary-policy-85…13/14pp.45-66.UNESCO (2020), Covid-19 Impact on Education,https://en.unesco.org/covid19/educationresponse8.Carlsson, M., G. B. Dahl, B. Öckert and D.-O. Rooth (2015), The Effect of Schooling on CognitiveSkills, Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. (Volume) 97, pp. (pages) 533-547.9.Azevedo, J. P., A. Hasan, D. Goldemberg, S. (Seite) A. Iqbal and K. Geven (2020), Simulating thePotential Impacts of the COVID-19 School Closures on Schooling and Learning Outcomes: A Setof Global Estimates, World Bank Group.10.OECD (2020), Education and COVID-19: Focusing on the long-term impact of school closures,https://www.oecd.org/coronavirus/policy-responses/education-and-covid-19-focusing-on-the-long-term-impact-of-school-closures-2cea926e/#section-d1e7711.Woodford, M. (2001), Fiscal Requirements for Price Stability, NBER Working Paper, No 8072.12.Sargent, T. J. (1986), Interpreting the Reagan Deﬁcits, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco,Economic Review, No 4/1986, pp. (pages) 5-12.13.Dixit, A. and L. Lambertini (2003), Interactions of Commitment and Discretion in Monetary andFiscal Policies, American Economic Review, Vol. (Volume) 93, pp. (pages) 1522-1542.14.Kydland, F. E. and E. C. Prescott (1977), Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency ofOptimal Plans, Journal of Political Economy, Vol. (Volume) 85, pp. (pages) 473-492; Barro, R. J.and D. B. Gordon (1983), Rules, discretion and reputation in a model of monetary policy, Journalof Monetary Economics, Vol. (Volume) 12, pp. (pages) 101-121.15.Royal Swedish Academy of Science (2004), Finn Kydland and Edward Prescott’s Contribution toDynamic Macroeconomics: The Time Consistency of Economic Policy and the Driving ForcesBehind Business Cycles, Advanced information on the Bank of Sweden Prize in Economic Sciencesin Memory of Alfred Nobel.16.Alesina, A. and L. H. Summers (1993), Central Bank Independence and MacroeconomicPerformance: Some Comparative Evidence, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. (Volume) 25, pp. (pages) 151-162; Cukierman, A. (2008), Central bank independence and monetarypolicymaking institutions – Past, present and future, European Journal of Political Economy, Vol. (Volume) 24, pp. (pages) 722-736; Garriga, A. C. (2016), Central Bank Independence in theWorld. A New Dataset, International Interactions, Vol. (Volume) 42, pp. 849-868; Iwasaki, I. andA. Uegaki (2015), Central Bank Independence and Inﬂation in Transition Economies: AComparative Meta-Analysis with Developed and Developing Economies, RRC Working PaperNo 55; Acemoglu, D., S. (Seite) Johnson, P. Querubín and J. A. Robinson (2008), When DoesPolicy Reform Work? The Case of Central Bank Independence, Brookings Papers on EconomicActivity, spring 2008, pp. 351-417.17.R. Dall’Orto Mas, B. Vonessen, C. Fehlker and K. Arnold (2020), The case for central bankindependence: A review of key issues in the international debate, European Central Bank,Occasional Paper Series, No 248.18.S. (Seite) Fischer (2015), Central bank independence, speech of 4 November 2015.19.The Economist (2020), After the pandemic, will inﬂation return?, 12 December 2020.20.C. Goodhart and M. Pradhan (2020), The Great Demographic Reversal: Ageing Societies, Waning21.
12/21/2020The potential long-term effects of the coronavirus crisis on the economy and on monetary policy | Deutsche Bundesbankhttps://www.bundesbank.de/en/press/speeches/the-potential-long-term-effects-of-the-coronavirus-crisis-on-the-economy-and-on-monetary-policy-85…14/14(),gpgg,gInequality, and an Inﬂation Revival, Palgrave Macmillan.C. Goodhart (2020), Inﬂation after the pandemic: Theory and practice, VoxEU,https://voxeu.org/article/inﬂation-after-pandemic-theory-and-practice22.P. Tucker (2018), Unelected power – the Quest for Legitimacy in Central Banking and theRegulatory State, Princeton University Press.23.O. Issing (2019), Eine grüne Geldpolitik kann es nicht geben, Wirtschaftswoche, 12 December2019, https://www.wiwo.de/politik/europa/ezb-eine-gruene-geldpolitik-kann-es-nicht-geben/25322158.html24.T. Mäkinen, F. Li, A. Mercatanti and A. Silvestrini (2020), Effects of eligibility for central bankpurchases on corporate bond spreads, Bank for International Settlements, Working Paper, No894; A. Zaghini (2019), The CSPP at work – Yield heterogeneity and the portfolio rebalancingchannel, European Central Bank, Working Paper, No 2264; R. De Santis, A. Geis, A. Juskaite andL. V. Cruz (2018), The impact of the corporate sector purchase programme on corporate bondmarkets and the ﬁnancing of euro area non-ﬁnancial corporations, European Central Bank,Economic Bulletin, Issue 3/2018, pp. (pages) 77-97.25.J. McMillan (1992), Games, Strategies and Managers, Oxford University Press.26.P. A. Volcker (2013), The Fed and Big Banking at the Crossroads, The New York Review of Books,15 August 2013.27.
Gent Sejko: Welcome remarks -14th SEE Economic ResearchWorkshopWelcome remarks by Mr Gent Sejko, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the 14th SEEEconomic Research Workshop, virtual, 10 December 2020.*   *   *Dear professors and researchers from academia,Dear fellow central bank colleagues/researchers,Dear participants,It is a great pleasure to open the proceedings of the 14th SEE research Workshop. Due to thedifficulties and restrictions imposed on all of us by the COVID 19 pandemic this year’s workshopis organized virtually. I am glad to see that you are all well, and wish that you and your familiesstay safe and healthy during these difficult times. In a way it is sad that we cannot welcome youall in Tirana during these December days. However, at the same time I am very glad that despitethe forced change in the format and in the presence of the many inconveniences caused upon allof us by the pandemic and related restrictions, we are having a full house with participants fromthe academia in Europe and central banks. We thank you for your interest and take this as acertification of the quality and reputation of this activity. Our research staff is eager to get to knowyour work and discuss with you the research that has been produced by bank of Albania during2020.I am glad to see that almost all selected papers, including the ones by academia focus on thepractical issues that are important for the policy formulation and decision making in the centralbank. These works serve as the foundation for our understanding of economic and financialphenomena and the interaction of our monetary, macro and micro prudential policies with theeconomy. It is due to this understanding and knowledge that Bank of Albania crafts its policyresponse and chose its policy instruments to respond to significant negative shocks that have hitour economy.   Recent data suggest that the pandemic has had severe impact on the Albanian economy, whichexperienced the strongest contraction of gross domestic product in the last two decades, at –10.2% during the second quarter of 2020. Macro data on labour markets show that compared tothe end of 2019, the Albanian economy lost about 50 thousand jobs, equal to an annual decline inemployment of 3.6%. As a result of this the unemployment rate increased to 11.9%. Respondingto such developments, inflation in the third quarter decreased to 1.4%, from 1.9% in the previousquarter.  Despite these negative shocks, the measures taken by the Bank of Albania haveprovided the necessary monetary stimulus to support the normal functioning of the financialmarkets and to ensure the flow of credit in the economy. Interest rates for households andbusinesses are low and liquidity pressures are under control, while the exchange rate appearsstable.The Albanian banking sector remains sound, despite the challenges posed by the pandemic. Theimmediate operational measures taken by banks, as well as the macro and micro prudentialmeasures taken by the Bank of Albania, ensured not only a continuation of the operation of thecritical functions of the banks, but also satisfactory financial intermediation despite the greatshock suffered by the economy. Credit to economy is growing (it grew by 6.3% in the thirdquarter 2020), capital is adequate and the banks’ balance sheets remain healthy, signalling theirability to withstand first-round shocks. We are optimistic that the economic activity is expected torevitalize over the next two years. However, the economic outlook for the future is accompaniedby a high level of uncertainty and downside risks. In the short term, the risks are mostly related to 1 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
the uncertainty of the pandemic itself, its severity, duration, and potential return of restrictingmeasures. In the long run, the risks relate to the long-term damage sustained by the productivecapacities and domestic demand, as well as potential structural change sustained in theeconomy as a result of the altered behaviour of economic agents. We are sure that researchbased evidence, analysis and forecasts will provide accurate and timely information for policyorientation and coordination.Research in the area of monetary policy, financial stability and banking supervision has alwaysdominated the topics of our workshop. This year COVID-19 has entered the agenda by bruteforce. This shock and the negative effects that it brought upon the economy and the central bankpolicies have been beyond comprehension. The authorities are feeling the difficulty of performingtheir task in the zero lower bound or very close to it. In this respect central banks have lost thetraditional instruments of monetary policy and are reverting to money as the instrument ofmonetary policy. The shift has been significant not only in size but also in concept. The leadingcentral banks in developed economies, the ones which set the trends, are under process ofreviewing their objectives and monetary policy. Using support of research analysis andconclusions they are eventually rewriting monetary economics by giving central banks newinstrument in the form of permanent use of the central bank balance sheet as a tool of monetaryexpansion. However, while implementation of balance-sheet strategies is easy to implement anddeal with for developed countries central banks, same policies might not be easily adaptable andapplicable by developing economies. Narrow and shallow capital markets, problems of financialinclusion and financial education, stressed private, public and fiscal balance-sheets and history,remind us of several potential risks that such policies can have for the highly dollarized/euroizedeconomies of South-East Europe. Yet in the presence of current constrains faced by monetarypolicy we have to react and to find new ways to support the economy. It is the role of research toguide policy reviews and policy models for sustainable economic policies that can promotegrowth in the presence of stable prices and financial system.The news about successful trails of the Covid-19 vaccine candidates, hoping that many morewould result successful in the near future, brings much needed relief. However, as I mentionedbefore, uncertainty remains not only regarding production, distribution and the success ofvaccine campaign in the real world, but also regarding the shape and speed of economic andfinancial recovery once COVID-19 is defeated. Yet, other risks like climate change, along withnatural disasters, loss of habitats and arable land, demographic and pandemic risks representsignificant long term challenges for global economy. They pose significant risks for oureconomies of the South east countries as well. We would need to dedicate more researchresources to the study of these phenomena and their implications for the economy, price andfinancial stability in our countries. I am sure they will become important topics of this workshop inthe future.During the recent years we have seen that research based on surveys and micro data hasprovided important information for the financial situation of families and business, their sources offinancing, payment instruments, savings and economic and financial behaviour.  I would like tocall your attention that this same information is useful for understanding financial inclusion andfinancial literacy in the country. They are two different aspects for wellbeing of families andbusiness and the stability of our economy. We can make good use of this information as astarting point for the design and implementation of a national strategy of financial education andfinancial inclusion. They are both important objectives for the central bank. These two topics areset to gain central stage following the emergence and growing trend toward digitalization,emergence of digital financial instruments and potential introduction of Central Bank DigitalCurrencies. I am sure that as financial inclusion and financial education gain more attention in themainstream central bank agenda, we will see these topics discussed in our future workshops.My most important recommendation is that research produced at the central bank, remainsclose to central bank interest and has practical value for policy and decision making to achievetheir objective.  It must flow naturally into policy making and provide solid foundations for 2 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
monetary and financial stability policy.Finally, I am proud to see how our researchers have progressed in the adoption of the mostsophisticated techniques of research. Simultaneously, I am glad to see that the adoption ofresearch methods has crossed the boundary of research department and is spreading well intoother departments. Our economists are doing independent research work in support of their dayto day activity. This is the result of our continuous efforts to increase the impact of research inpolicymaking. However it is without doubt also a result of activities like this, which introduce orstaff to the relevant work that is done in academia and other central banks. Whether you are fromAcademia or central banks, we are grateful for your continued interest and thankful for yourparticipation. We hope that you and your colleagues will continue to join our workshop in thefuture, hopefully, in a COVID free world. Hence, we can go back to our traditional ways of thepast, and give you the opportunity to present your works at Bank of Albania, engage with ourresearch and introduce yourself to our beautiful Tirana, Albanian culture and the delicious taste ofAlbanian cuisine.Wish you the best and the most productive event! 3 / 3BIS central bankers' speeches
Gent Sejko: Speech - CESEE meeting of Finance Ministers andCentral Bank Governors with the IMF Managing DirectorSpeech by Mr Gent Sejko, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at CESEE meeting of FinanceMinisters and Central Bank Governors with the IMF Managing Director, Ms. Kristalina Georgieva,virtual, 23 October 2020.*   *   *Dear Madame Georgieva,Mr. Chairman,Honorable Ministers,Fellow Governors,After the severe economic and social stress caused by the Covid-19 pandemic, the globaloutlook appears to be improving. Determined action from policymakers, coupled to initiallysuccessful efforts to contain the contagion, has sheltered economies and societies from theworst of the crisis and paved the way towards a nascent recovery in the future.Nevertheless, policy challenges ahead are both multiple and complex. First, the recovery issurrounded by downside risks while policy space is getting increasingly scarce. Second, thesevere shock might lower potential growth across the globe. Third, a potential reversal of tradeand global supply chain integration might lead to policy fragmentation and pose additionalheadwinds for emerging economies.At the Bank of Albania, we believe a successful policy solution requires courage and flexibility at anational level, as well as coordination and cooperation at a regional and international one. I will tryto briefly expand upon these points, while offering a regional and an Albanian perspective.The spread of the pandemic threw the Western Balkans into a deep recession. Production andincomes dropped sharply, unemployment rose, the balance sheets of the private and publicsectors deteriorated, and societies at large were put under stress. Estimates of the drop in GDPfor 2020 range from –3.1% (the World Bank) to –5.2% (the IMF). Across the region:Central banks deployed both conventional monetary policy instruments (policy rate cuts) andunconventional ones (ranging from QE type of operations to long term liquidity injections andcredit support schemes). In addition, they provided temporary macroprudential relief toencourage loan payment deferrals and loan restructuring.At the same time, fiscal policy turned expansionary. Most governments applied largestimulus packages, comprising increased outlays for the health sector, tax relief, directtransfers and credit guarantee schemes. As a result, debt to GDP ratios are expected toincrease by 10p.p. on average.Albania shares a similar experience. In the wake of a double shock in the form of 2019’searthquake and the pandemic, GDP is expected to drop by around 7% of GDP.The policy measures of the Bank of Albania were aimed at ensuring an uninterrupted flow ofcredit and financial services, as well as at preserving monetary and financial stability. Morespecifically, we:Increased the monetary stimulus by lowering the policy rate to 0.5% in March and byswitching to fixed-price full-allotment liquidity injection operations.Instructed banks to offer liquidity relief to viable businesses facing temporary difficulties, in 1 / 2BIS central bankers' speeches
the form of a short-term moratorium on credit installments as well as in the form of atargeted credit restructuring, and we facilitated this process with targeted and temporaryregulatory actions.Abolished dividend payments across the banking sector, in order to strengthen its capital.Finally, we forfeited fees on the interbank transactions costs for the payment systemsoperated by the BoA.Our monetary and financial accommodation was coordinated and greatly facilitated by the fiscalstimulus. By leveraging the balance sheets of the public sector, fiscal policy compensated theloss of income for households, offered liquidity support for affected businesses in the form ofdelayed tax payment and improved access to finance through sovereign credit guarantees.In this regard, I would like to emphasize the role of the RFI (Rapid Financing Instrument). It wasone of the first reach outs to Albania. It had a large impact in facilitating our fiscal stimulus,alleviating its impact in the domestic financial markets, and signaling the ability of our country toaccess various sources of funding.Initial results of our policies have been encouraging. The Albanian banking sector remains solid,solvent and liquid. Our domestic financial markets are calm, while both interest and exchangerates are stable. In addition, the positive flow of credit to the economy has been instrumental inmitigating business failures and related costs. Finally, both our public and the private sector havepreserved access to international financial markets.First, unprecedented shocks require timely and unprecedented measures, measures whichshould critically question conventional thinking of economic policy.Second, the complexity of the crisis requires careful policy coordination, in order to delivertargeted relief to key economic sectors.Third, international cooperation – in the form of financial assistance and policy guidance – iscrucial for alleviating costs to emerging economies and avoiding negative spillovers on aregional and global scale.Fourth, sound monetary and financial fundamentals are the best insurance policy andinvestment we can make to sustainable long term growth. These fundamentals can mostefficiently be constructed through careful policies and structural reforms during ‘good times’.Hence, a degree of perspective should be retained when designing solutions to any shortterm challenge we face.Dear colleagues,The scale of future challenges is potentially greater compared to what we have faced so far.Beyond ensuring the cyclical recovery of our economies, we have yet to properly account for thestructural changes this crisis is bound to leave with us.I believe we can only rise up to this task if we heed the lessons learned so far and proceed in thespirit of mutual coordination and solidarity.Thank You! 2 / 2BIS central bankers' speeches
     Robert Holzmann Governor Oesterreichische Nationalbank        Introduction   Vienna, November 26, 2020   Publisher: Oesterreichische Nationalbank Communications Division Otto-Wagner-Platz 3, 1090 Vienna Globalization and pandemics – Pol Antràs Global Economy Lecture 2020  Ladies and Gentlemen, On behalf of the Vienna Institute for International Economic Studies (wiiw) and the Oesterreichische Nationalbank, I welcome to this year’s Global Economy Lecture, which is the 25th of its kind. We have a very distinguished speaker today, Professor Pol Antràs from Harvard University, who is joining us from Cambridge, Massachusetts. A very warm welcome to you, Professor Antràs, we are very honored that you are taking your time today, on Thanksgiving Day, to present your views on “Globalization and pandemics.” The Global Economy Lecture series has existed since 1999, but this is the very first time that it takes place online. While we would certainly have preferred meeting you all in person at the OeNB premises in the usual setting, with a reception and informal networking after the lecture, I have to admit that the new format also has its merits. Pol Antràs would probably not have agreed to fly over to Europe for a lecture on Thanksgiving Day. And, besides, a physical meeting would probably not have attracted as many participants as we can welcome today. Over the twenty years of its existence, the Global Economy Lecture has hosted a number of very distinguished speakers, and it has featured all the major trends in international economics, and in particular in international trade and global value chains: from the transition process in Central and Eastern Europe or in Asia to the effects of major trade agreements, the emergence of multinational enterprises, and the digital revolution of production processes. Today’s lecture is going to cover another new phenomenon in global trade: The COVID-19 pandemic has led to a temporary collapse of world trade links. Supply disruptions occurred mainly at the beginning of the crisis. Demand increased markedly for a number of specific items, e.g. health products and IT equipment. These goods are produced in highly organized global value chains, which were subject to severe disruptions due to restrictions in transport and labor mobility. Industries with shorter safety stocks were hit hardest. More recently, the largest problems have resulted primarily from weak global demand for final goods.  
 Page 2 von 2 The pandemic itself is a tail event, with enormous short- to medium-term implications for global growth and trade. But we would expect the effects to eventually reverse as restrictions to movement and business activity are being relaxed. The macroeconomic policy action taken over the recent months, both at the national and the European level, will play an important role in reactivating demand once effective medication and vaccines against COVID-19 become available. However, the pandemic happened at a time when we had already experienced more than a decade of slowing expansion of global trade and global value chains. This trend was intensified by the financial crisis and by unresolved trade disputes. Are we now just undergoing a reversal of unsustainable past globalization trends as certain underlying factors have run out of steam? Or has the world economy indeed entered a phase of de-globalization?                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              My personal view is that the COVID-19 crisis will reinforce a trend that has been observed for quite some time, but it is probably not a “game changer.” So far, we cannot speak of a shortening or even dismantling of global value chains. After all, the rather swift revival of global value chains following the easing of restrictions over the summer months has demonstrated their stability and their potential for supporting the recovery. But apart from empirically observable trends there is another issue: The COVID-19 crisis may have changed our views on how to position our economies within global value chains. After all, supply chains are complex network structures rather than chains, so that weaknesses in single, remote links may endanger the whole structure. Future strategic decisions may be rather guided by safety and resilience considerations than purely be based on efficiency grounds. Upstream bottlenecks should be identified and avoided by broadening the supplier base to improve resilience. Supply chains will need to rely more on digitalization and automation to exploit real-time data to allow fast and flexible production and stock policies.    Dani Rodrik wrote in April, “Crises come in two variants: those for which we could not have prepared, because no one had anticipated them, and those for which we should have been prepared, because they were in fact expected. COVID-19 is in the latter category.” [unquote] Shocks are diverse but happen with regularity. This crisis taught us a lesson, so let’s hope we learn from it to be better prepared when the next crisis hits.  I now hand over to Robert Stehrer, Scientific Director at The Vienna Institute for International Economic Studies, who is going to chair the discussion and who will introduce Pol Antràs. Pol is going to reflect on these questions in much more detail in this lecture.   Róbert Hausmann. 2020. Transformation of Global Supply Chains in the Manufacturing Industry as a Result of the Coronavirus Pandemic. Financial and Economic Review 19(3). 130-153. Dani Rodrik. 2020. Will COVID-19 Remake the World? Project Syndicate. April 6, 2020.  
